The expression of homage

[verse 1] Shantideva’ s objects of homage, when he says, “I bow down,” are the Sugatas, “those who go in bliss.” They are so called because they have journeyed to the state of perfect buddhahood, the blissful result of having relied upon the blissful path, namely, the vehicle of the Bodhisattvas. The object of homage is thus the Jewel of Buddha.
If the term Sugata is analyzed etymologically, we find that the element su means “well, beauteously, blissfully.” And when this is conjoined with gata, which means “goes or gone,” the resulting idea is, first, of one who goes or proceeds well or beautifully; second, one who goes without ever turning back; and third, one who goes perfectly or completely. The term therefore has three meanings, which are also interpreted in the teaching of the learned masters of Tibet and India as referring respectively to the qualities of elimination, of realization, and of elimination and realization taken together.It is sufficient however to understand the word sugata in the following manner.
When one says that the Buddhas go well or beautifully, this means that, in being unstained by faults, namely, suffering and the origin of suffering (which belong to samsara with its defiled emotions), they are likened to beings who are endowed with beautiful and graceful forms. In this they are different from the denizens of samsara, for the worlds of existence are not beyond suffering and its causes.
When it is said that the Buddhas go without ever turning back, this means that, since they have extirpated the seed of the view of self, they never again return to samsarajust as there can be no more fire once the firewood has been consumed. They are like people who have been completely cured from smallpox [and cannot be reinfected again]. In this, their path is different from the paths of the non-Buddhists. For although non-Buddhist paths may lead to the very Peak of Existence, they are unable to go beyond the confines of samsara.
When it is said that the Buddhas have gone perfectly or completely, this means that there is not the slightest detail of the supreme qualities of complete elimination and realization that they have not realized. They are like vessels filled to the brim. In their manner of going, therefore, the Buddhas are different from the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas. For even though the latter do not fall back into samsara, their achievements are of a lesser kind precisely because their qualities of elimination and realization are not perfect and complete.
Now, since the Bhagavan Buddha mastered the dharmakaya, the body of the Dharma, in the twin aspects of transmission and realization, the root verse says that he possesses the “Dharma-body,” namely, the Jewel of Dharma. It is said in the Uttaratantra-shastra:
The dharmakaya should be understood as two:
The dharmadhatu utterly unstained,
And then the corresponding causes of the same,
The teaching in its aspects both profound and vast.
In other words, there is the “Dharma-body” that is the realization of the ten strengths of a Buddha and so on, and there is the cause of this realization, the cause that is attuned to it, namely, the “Dharma-body” that is the profound and vast Dharma of transmission in all its categories. And all this, the Buddha is said to possess.
Finally, the “Buddha’s heirs or offspring” refers to the supreme Jewel of Sangha. It is generally said that the child of the Buddha’s body was [his son] Rahula. The offspring of his speech are the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, whereas the offspring of his mind are the Bodhisattvas. For just as the eldest son of a mighty king is the one who holds the lineage of his father, who takes responsibility for the latter’s retinue and subjects, and who holds the key to the treasury, the supreme offspring of the Buddha’s mind, the Bodhisattvas, are indeed the holders of the lineage of the Conquerors. They have in their possession the treasury of the sublime teaching. And they protect and care for the entourage of beings who are yet to be trained. Thus these same Bodhisattvas, the offspring of the Buddha’s mind, are the Sangha of the Mahayana. To these Three Jewelsand not only to them but also to the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas, and indeed to anyone superior to him in even a single quality (such as slight seniority in training) or some benefactorto all who are thus worthy of veneration, all without exception, the author bows down, paying homage with his body, speech, and mind.
The person who pays homage in this way is the master Shantideva; and he does so after the noble manner of his saintly forebears. As for the moment in which he does so, he pays homage just before composing his treatise. He does this, first, to dispel obstacles to the completion of his work; second, to inspire those who come after him with perfect confidence in the text, so that they will have faith and will gain a keen interest in its message; and third, to remove hindrances to the successful transmission and reception of his work. The noble Nagarjuna has said:
The writer of a treatise who pays homage to the Buddha
Cannot fail to have success.
For he is stimulating faith and interest
Both toward the Buddha and the text itself.
And the Lalitavishtara-sutra says:
Full ripening of merit brings forth joy, dispelling every sorrow.
People who have merit are the ones who gain their purpose.
The [Tibetan] continuative particle occurring at the end of the second line of the root stanza indicates that, having paid homage, Shantideva will now compose his treatise.

The author’s commitment to compose

The activity or discipline of the Bodhisattvas, the offspring of the mind of the Sugata or Buddha, is threefold. It consists in the discipline of restraining from evil activity, the discipline of gathering virtue, and the discipline of bringing benefit to beings. The present demonstration (which is unmistaken and complete) of all the ways or means of embracing and implementing such a discipline is not in any way pretentious, neither is it the personal invention of the author. Shantideva announces that he will explain it in accordance with the teachings of the Conqueror, succinctly and in a manner easy to understand. And he will do so “according to the scriptures” so that we may have confidence in it. For it is said in the Pramanavarttika:
The teachings of Buddha we may trust.
For since he is exempt from fault,
There is in him no cause for lies.
Know therefore that the scriptures are exempt from error.
The immaculate teachings of the Conqueror (contained in the “unending knot”of his heart), which arose from the vase of his throat, unfolded upon the lotus of his tongue, and issued from between his conch-white teeth, still exist undiminished. They are all the doctrines of the precious Tripitaka. This being so, it could be argued that the composition of the present text is a repetition of what already exists and is therefore superfluous. But there is no fault here. For the teachings of the Conqueror are vast and the scriptures are numerous, while the beings of this decadent age are short-lived and feeble both in understanding and application. They are overpowered by foolishness and indolence. It is difficult for them to assimilate all these teachings, and they are ignorant of how to combine and implement them. Thinking of such beings with great kindness, Shantideva pledges to compose a treatise that will describe the activities of the Bodhisattvas, completely and without error, in the form of a practical instruction, bringing together all the teachings, widespread as they are, in a manner that is easy to understand and practice.
Generally, there are four kinds of treatise: treatises that impose order on what appears disorganized, treatises that elucidate difficult points, treatises that bring together scattered elements, and treatises that are composed with a view to practice. The present text belongs to the third and fourth categories.
Supreme beings never give up their pledges. Thus the purpose of Shantideva’s promise to compose the text is to ensure the completion of his work. As it is said in the Prajnadanda by Nagarjuna:
Holy beings do not promise many things.
But if they pledge themselves to some demanding task,
It is as if they carve a picture on a stone:
They do not turn from it though it may cost their lives.

The taking of a humble attitude

[verse 2] Shantideva says that he has no profound instructions to give that are not already to be found in the earlier teachings of the Buddha and of masters such as Nagarjuna and Asanga. Moreover, with regard to the art of composition, he is self-effacing. Yet Vibhutichandra has observed:
Within the fold of Buddha’s Doctrine,
Many have appeared who were great masters, mighty beings.
But someone to compare with Shantideva,
In wisdom and experience, is nowhere to be found.
This is very true. Nevertheless, Shantideva adopts an attitude of modesty. He says that, as far as the art of prosody is concerned, he has no literary skill that might distinguish him above othersthe kind of stylistic elegance that one finds in such texts as the Jatakamala in thirty-four chapters by the master Aryashura, and the Kalpalata by King Kshemendra. For though these texts merely repeat what the sutras say about the Buddha’s previous incarnations, they are so beautifully and poetically composed that they are a delight for the learned. For this reason, Shantideva says that in composing the Bodhicharyavatara, he does not claim to be of great help to others. He therefore rids himself of intellectual pride regarding the form and meaning of his words.
What, then, is the purpose of his writing? Shantideva says that he has composed his work in order to meditate upon and habituate himself to the conduct of the Bodhisattvas, which consists in the motivation of bodhichitta and the practice of the six paramitas. Moreover, of the three [scholarly] activities, composition is more important than teaching and debate. For as the master Chandragomin has said:
Therefore of the threefold craft of scholars,
There may be some uncertainty in discourse and debate,
But there’s no room for this in commentary.
What is the reason for taking a humble attitude? It is said that “On the peak of pride, the water of good qualities does not stay.” When the mind is puffed up with conceit, it cannot contain the water of the excellent qualities of the Dharma of transmission and realization. Rather it is liable to be deceived by Mara. While in this state, therefore, even if one composes treatises, they will be of no benefit to others. Accordingly, it is in order to eliminate such faults that Shantideva adopts a humble attitude.

 The stirring up of a joyful and enthusiastic attitude

[verse 3] Given that it is sufficient to understand the present subject for oneself, why, one might ask, is it necessary to compose a text? Shantideva says that, by such means, the strength of his vivid, yearning, and confident faithin the activities of the Bodhisattvas will intensify for a little while, so that he can meditate upon and cultivate virtue, namely, the thought of bodhichitta and the six paramitas. For it is through continuous meditation and cultivation that bodhichitta is intensified. It is thus that Shantideva stirs up a joyful and enthusiastic attitude in his own regard.
Humbling himself once again, he says that other people, with a karmic fortune equal to his, who are sincere and take an interest in Bodhisattva activitiesif ever they chance upon his Bodhicharyavataramight also rejoice in the ways of the Bodhisattvas and so be happy to engage in them. He thus stirs up an enthusiastic attitude with regard to others, telling himself that his work might be of some value to them. All this is necessary because when the mind is depressed, it sinks into laziness and inactivity, becoming an unsuitable vessel for the acquisition of good qualities. Therefore Shantideva sets himself in a joyful frame of mind and stirs himself into a high spirit of enthusiasm. To be sure, the generation of any excellent quality is impeded when the mind falls to either extreme, whether of arrogance or of self-denigration. This can be seen in the Pitaputrasamagama-sutra, in the part where the Lord set his father, King Shuddhodana, on the true path.
In conclusion, these four prerequisites (the homage, the promise to complete the work, humility, and enthusiasm) apply not just to the composition of treatises, but to any activity, whether of explaining or listening to the teachings, meditating on them, and so forth. They ensure that whatever one does will proceed without impediment and that one’s task will be brought to a good conclusion. The two poles of intellectual arrogance and lazy depression will both be avoided. When these four features are present, everything one embarks upon will be brought to a worthwhile fulfillment. Such indeed is the practice of exemplary people.
These four prerequisites also exemplify the fourfold interrelated purpose.The subject to be set forth is expressed in the root text as the practice of the Bodhisattva discipline. Its immediate purpose is expressed by saying that it will be meaningful to see the text because it is according to the scriptures. Its ultimate finality is the supreme result to be attained, namely, the condition of the Sugatas, who have gone in bliss, possess the body of Dharma, and are surrounded by their retinues of Bodhisattvas. And finally, with regard to the connection between these three features, it is clear that if the earlier ones are not present, the later ones cannot arise.
According to different masters, the fourfold interrelated purpose aims to inspire others with confidence, to remove doubts regarding the meaning, to obviate wrong thoughts, and to embellish the text.

 The main body of the treatise

The exposition of the treatise itself follows a structure taken from the Indian texts:
May bodhichitta, precious and sublime,
Arise where it has not yet come to be.
And where it has arisen may it never fail,
But grow and increase ever more and more.
Thus the ten chapters of the treatise are organized into four parts. Three chapters are devoted to the generation of bodhichitta where it has not previously existed; three chapters are devoted to the prevention of bodhichitta from weakening once it has been brought to birth; three chapters are devoted to the intensification of bodhichitta thus preserved; and finally, there is a concluding chapter in which the resultant merit is dedicated for the benefit of others. I propose to explain the Bodhisattvacharyavatara, the Way of the Bodhisattva, in the same way.

PART ONE

The Generation of Bodhichitta Where It Has Not Previously Existed

THE EXCELLENCE AND BENEFITS OF BODHICHITTA
Whereby the Heart Is Filled with Joy

 The basis required for the generation of bodhichitta

 The human body as a basis for the generation of bodhichitta
When describing the excellence of the human form in terms of the absence of unfavorable conditions, one speaks of “freedom, leisure, or ease.” When describing it in terms of the presence of favorable factors, one speaks of “advantages, endowments, or wealth.” Nagarjuna gives the following summary:
To be in hell, to be a preta or a beast,
To be a long-lived god or else a wild barbarian,
To have false views, to live in ages when a Buddha has not come,
To have one’s faculties impairedall these are absences of freedom.
To be exempt from the above shortcomings, on the other hand, is to possess the eight freedoms. Nagarjuna then goes on to describe the five personal advantages:
A human birth within a central land, with all one’s faculties complete,
Faith in the Three Jewels, and freedom from unsuited karmic circumstances.
He defines the five circumstantial advantages as being when
A Buddha has appeared and taught,
The Doctrine still remains, and there are those who practice it
And who are lovingly disposed to others.
[verse 4] When we reflect in terms of causes, examples, or numerical comparison, it becomes clear that this precious human life, endowed with a full complement of eight freedoms and ten advantages, is extremely difficult to obtain. This is obvious when we consider its causes: the basic requirement of pure ethical conduct, the accessory requirement of generosity and the other five paramitas, and the necessary connecting principle afforded by pure aspirations.
When we reflect with the help of examples, it is clear that the attainment of a human existence is more difficult and rare than the chance occurrence of a blind turtle that lives in the depths of the ocean rising to the surface (which it does only once in a hundred years) to find its head inside a wooden yoke floating at random on the sea. Alternatively, considered in terms of numerical comparisons, the quantity of beings in the hell realms are as the particles of dust upon the surface of the entire earth. Proportionately, the pretas or hungry ghosts are like the grains of sand in the river Ganges, whereas animals are like the grains in a vat of beer. The asuras or demigods are like snowflakes in a blizzard, while the gods and humans are like the motes of dust on one’s fingernail. Again, another comparison may be made, this time according to the number of stars visible at night, as compared with the stars that can be seen by day.Reflecting thus, we should be conscious of how difficult it is to acquire a human existence.
Thanks to this achievementto the compassion of our teachers and the Three Jewels and to the power of our good karmawe are in a position to achieve an objective corresponding to one of the three spiritual capacities of beings: high rebirth in samsara or definitive benefit [namely, liberation or enlightenment]. In this human state, however, death can strike at any time, for its causes are uncertain and there is no saying that we shall not be dead before this very evening. And if we fail to practice the sublime Dharma, which is so helpful to ourselves and others; and if we simply stay as we are, frittering away this human existence in distraction, rendering our freedoms and advantages meaningless, how can we possibly expect to find the excellence of this human form again? We shall certainly fail. Therefore Shantideva warns us not to render ineffectual these freedoms and advantages, not to let them go to waste.
To repeat, we have at the present time gained a human life endowed with freedoms and advantages; we have met with a qualified master and received profound teachings. Now that we have happened upon this situation, so hard to find, so easy to destroy, we must reflect again and again on the tremendous chance that lies within our reach. All the great exploits of worldly life we should just leave aside, and we should reject outright all trivial pursuits. And while we have the light of life, we should spend our time simply practicing the Dharma. We must be quick to seize the essence of our freedoms and advantages. As the glorious Atisha Dipamkara has said:
This life so short, so many things to know!
You have no notion of how long you have to live.
So like the swan that milk from water strains,
Pursue the goal that you yourself desire.

 The mind as a basis for bodhichitta

[verse 5] Here, Shantideva uses the image of the deep darkness of a sunless night unlit by any moon, when the sky is covered by thick clouds that hide the stars, and when everything is suddenly and for a split second illuminated by a flash of lightning. The present situation of beings is indeed like such a night, for the sun of omniscient primordial wisdom does not shine. It is a state of profound obscurity, for beings are ignorant of what they should do and what they should avoid. The sky moreover is covered with clouds, the obscurations brought about by the presence in their minds of the three or five poisons. It is in such circumstances as these that, by the coming together of two factorsthe light of the Buddhas’ bodhichitta and aspirations, and the merit of beings accumulated in the pastvirtuous thoughts arise very occasionally in the minds of ordinary, worldly beings, overshadowed as they are by the gloom of ignorance. Such virtuous thoughts are simply the desire or willingness to do something good and positive. They are fleeting impulses and they do not happen often (perhaps once in a hundred times, or twice in a thousand). They are extremely rare.
Therefore if the state of mind of actually wanting to accomplish something good occurs to you, you should be like a blind man who has managed to catch hold of a cow’s tail. You should resolve never to lose it, but to develop it more and more. Don’t ask your father. Don’t discuss it with your mother. Don’t let others decide for you. Just make up your own mind and be independent. Do not give yourself over to others, but be like a yak with its nose rope tied around its own head. Leave your enemies to their own devices; let your fields dry up. Practice earnestly, instead, the ten innermost riches of the Kadampa masters of oldand the famous three fierce mantras of the Dharma lord Tsangpa Gyaré. Tell yourself: “I will truly practice the sacred Dharma.” And once the pledge is taken, it must be fulfilled!
The ten innermost riches are the three actions [of leaving, seeking, and obtaining], the four objectives, and the three vajras. The three actions are to leave the fellowship of humans, to seek the fellowship of dogs, and to obtain the fellowship of the enlightened. The four objectives are to turn your mind to the Dharma, to turn your Dharma to the condition of a beggar, to orient your beggarly condition toward your death, and to aim to die in a lonely cave. Regarding the three vajras, you start with the vajra of no procrastination, you conclude with the vajra of no need to be ashamed, and you take as your companion the vajra of primordial wisdom. The three fierce mantras are “Whatever has to happen, let it happen!”, “Whatever the situation is, it’s fine!”, and “I really don’t need anything!”

 The benefits of bodhichitta

 The general benefits of generating bodhichitta

 Bodhichitta is superior to all other virtues

[verse 6] As we have explained above, thoughts of wishing to accomplish something good are weak, like the flickering of lightning, whereas evil, nonvirtuous thoughts are like thick darkness and are our constant companions. They are so strong that they can throw us into the lower realms, and they are described as overwhelming because they are so difficult to reverse. Except for the precious mind of perfect bodhichitta, which shines brilliantly like the sun, what other ordinary virtue is able to overcome them? There is none. [verse 7] The reason for saying this is that for many agesthree countless aeons and morethe powerful Sages,the perfect Buddhas, deeply reflected upon one thing alone: the means to bring numberless beings to immediate benefit and ultimate bliss. And they have indeed found something that purifies evil committed in the past, that severs the continuum of evil to come, that overwhelms the defiled emotions of the mind, that nurtures and increases the tiny roots of virtue, and that brings the final achievement of great enlightenment. And seeing its benefit, they have taught it to disciples who might be trained. It is bodhichitta, the mind of enlightenmentthe one factor that throughout the three times and for countless multitudes of beings secures easily and without travail an immediate benefit in the present moment and ultimately the supreme happiness of unsurpassed buddhahood.
[verse 8] Consequently, for those who wish and strive to halt the many ills of their own existence (the sufferings of birth, sickness, aging, and death), and for those who wish to clear away the sorrows of other beings in this and future livesin short, for those who wish that, both now and ultimately, the myriad kinds of bliss be enjoyed by everyone, themselves and othersbodhichitta is the method to adopt. It must be seized by the mind and never relinquished.

 A change of name and of status

[verse 9] It does not matter whether they are men or women, young or old, or whether their position in society is high or low. If the jewel of bodhichitta arises in the minds of suffering beings, who till then were languishing in the prison of samsara, bound by the chains of karma and defilement, they instantly undergo a change of identity. Henceforth, they are crowned with the name “Child of the Sugatas.” They are called Bodhisattvas, heroes and heroines of enlightenment. Their status changes: they become objects of reverence and offering for the whole world, both gods and human beings. They are moreover said to be worthy of reverence even by the Buddhas themselves, for the latter have bodhichitta as their master.

 The benefits of bodhichitta shown by means of examples

Here there are six sections: 
(1) the example of alchemy, showing that bodhichitta leads to the attainment of buddhahood; 
(2) the example of a jewel, showing bodhichitta’s great worth; 
(3) the example of the miraculous fruit-bearing tree, showing that bodhichitta’s root of virtue is inexhaustible and constantly increases; 
(4) the example of the heroic bodyguard, showing how bodhichitta overpowers the kind of evil that is definite [in being certain to ripen in an experienced effect]; 
(5) the example of the fires at the end of the kalpa, showing how bodhichitta eradicates the kind of evil that is indefinite [and may not itself ripen in a corresponding effect]. Finally, 
(6) there are further examples that are not found in the root verses but are mentioned in other texts.

 The example of alchemy

[verse 10] Here, bodhichitta is described using an example taken from alchemy, the point of comparison being the transformation of something bad into something good. By means of the supreme substance, the elixir of the alchemists (the gold-producing mercury), a single ounce of iron may be transmuted into a thousand ounces of pure gold. In the same way, if, with bodhichitta, one lays hold of this lowly human body composed of numerous impure substances, and if, instead of rejecting it as the Shravakas do, one adopts it throughout the course of many lifetimes in order to secure the welfare of others, this [human] body will itself become the body of the Buddha. It becomes something endowed with unimaginable qualities of excellence: a priceless wish-fulfilling jewel that protects from all the drawbacks of samsara and nirvana and grants the supreme perfection of the twofold aim.Since it is able to effect such an extraordinary transformation, the extraordinary elixir of bodhichitta is something to be tightly grasped, never to be relinquished. We should therefore pledge ourselves to take hold of it as Shantideva says.

 The example of the jewel

[verse 11] The image adopted here is that of merchants journeying to an island somewhere in the ocean. They rely on a captain, in other words, a skillful leader, and hold in high esteem the jewels that he has appraised. In the same way, those who wish to make the voyage to the isle of liberation and omniscience first rely on the only guide, the peerless Buddha. With his boundless knowledge of omniscience, he has well examined, without error or confusion and for aeons of time, all the sublime teachings. And he has seen that, since bodhichitta is that by which buddhahood itself is obtained, it is supremely beneficial and more precious than any other teaching. For this reason, he has taught it to those who might be trained. Therefore, those who wish to dispel all the sufferings implicit in the condition of beings wandering in the six realms must take to heart this precious mind of enlightenment. And they must do this properly according to the three stages of preparation, actual commitment, and conclusion.They must hold to it tightly and constantly with mindfulness, vigilant introspection, and carefulness, without ever letting it go.

 The example of the miraculous fruit-bearing tree

[verse 12] All other virtues of whatever kind that are not informed by bodhichitta are like the plantain tree, which bears fruit only once. When the fruit ripens, the tree gives nothing more and dies from its roots. Likewise, virtuous action tending to happiness gives its result in the form of high rebirth in samsara, but then it dwindles and is exhausted. Furthermore, the virtue of the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas ripens as the exhaustion of all the aggregates, which disappear without leaving any remainder. By contrast, virtue that is infused with bodhichittais like a perfect, miraculous fruit-bearing tree, the fruits of which never vanish but become ever more plentiful. Even after giving its fully ripened effect in the form of abundant but temporary happiness in the divine and human states, it is still not exhausted. Its (karmic) effects similar to the causecontinue to grow and increase without end, until a vast result is finally produced: the mass of merit that constitutes the body of a Buddha.

 The example of the heroic bodyguard

[verse 13] Unbearable and dreadful wickedness, such as the evil of rejecting the Dharma or harming the Three Jewels, or the sins of immediate effect,are certain to produce the result of great suffering in the Hell of Unrelenting Pain.Nevertheless, just like a murderer who, having recourse to the protection of a powerful escort, is instantaneously delivered from all fear of harm even if he meets the avenging son of his former victim, in the same way, whoever has precious bodhichitta is instantly freed from the sufferings of hell, which are the wages of great evil. Birth in hell does not occur; or if it does, one is instantly freed, having suffered no more than the time it takes for a ball of silk to bounce back up from the floor! This being so, how could those who are fearful of the effects of their evil actions not rely on bodhichitta? It is surely the rational thing to do!

 The example of the fires at the end of time

[verse 14] The conflagration at the end of time consumes the world without leaving anything behindnot even the ashes of burnt grass. In the same way, and in addition to the evils described above, bodhichitta definitely and completely consumes or purifies in a single instant all other extreme negativities, such as slaughtering a hundred people. No remainder is left behind to be experienced. How, therefore, can anyone do without bodhichitta? It is surely a universal necessity.

 The benefits of bodhichitta explained in other texts

The other unbounded benefits of bodhichitta, which are beyond the mind’s ability to calculate, were explained by the Buddha’s great regent Maitreya, the loving protector, who in the fullness of his wisdom set them forth, with the help of two hundred and thirty examples, to the son of a wealthy merchant, the youthful Bodhisattva Sudhana. They are all to be found in the Gandavyuha chapter of the Avatamsaka. Since Shantideva has referred us to this text, here is the relevant passage. The Gandavyuha says:
In the presence of the noble Manjushri, the Bodhisattva Sudhana generated the mind of enlightenment, whereupon Manjushri instructed him and sent him to the monk Meghashri. One by one, Sudhana attended one hundred and ten spiritual masters and each of them taught him a single aspect of the practice of the Bodhisattvas. Finally, he came again into the presence of the venerable Bodhisattva Maitreya, who was living in a southern land on the shore of the sea. Maitreya spoke to his attendants and said:
Consider now the great perfection of his thought!
Sudhana (the son of one so well-endowed with wealth)
Comes seeking now the Bodhisattva deeds.
He, the wise and learned, has now come to me.
Did you journey well, O you in whom
Compassion and a gentle love have sprung?
Did you journey well into Maitreya’s mighty mandala
Did you journey well, who are so peaceful to behold?
Accomplishing such hardships, are you not fatigued?
Approach, be welcome, you whose mind is pure!
Comforted and encouraged by these words, Sudhana gave an account of what he had experienced and requested Maitreya to speak about the deeds of Bodhisattvas. In reply, Maitreya told him to look into his palace, the name of which was “Essence Adorned by the Ornaments of Vairochana.” Sudhana went to the palace and at each of its windows he saw one of the ways in which the venerable Maitreya had himself trained in the deeds of the Bodhisattvas, giving away his head and limbs. So it was that Sudhana learned all the Bodhisattva deeds and took them perfectly to heart.
The protector Maitreya taught to him the benefits of bodhichitta at great length: “O son of my lineage, bodhichitta is like a seed from which the qualities of the Buddhas grow. It is like a field, in which the goodness of all beings flourishes. It is like the earth, which is the foundation of the entire universe . . . Son of my lineage! These are the limitless qualities and benefits of bodhichitta, and even then there are more!”
There are, however, three main benefits of bodhichitta. It causes one to attain buddhahood; it increases virtue; and it purifies evil.
 The specific benefits of bodhichitta in intention and the specific benefits of bodhichitta in action
 Classification of bodhichitta in intention and action
Since all the qualities of the Mahayana path and its result arise from cultivating a state of mind turned to supreme enlightenment, one must generate bodhichitta at the very beginning. Bodhichitta is then classified, first, as “plain” [and easily cultivated] or relative bodhichitta, which is engendered on the basis of prompting; and, second, as “subtle” or ultimate bodhichitta, which is gained through [the recognition of] ultimate reality.
 Plain or relative bodhichitta, engendered on the basis of prompting
Maitreya said (in the Sutralankara):
The power of a friend, the power of the cause, the power of the root,
The power of listening to the teachings and of virtuous practice:
From these it comes both stable and unstable;
This, I say, is bodhichitta that is shown by others.
The “power of [meeting a spiritual] friend,” as mentioned in the verse, can be illustrated by the story of an encounter in the past between three young men and a Buddha accompanied by his two main disciples. One of the boys made the aspiration to become like the Buddha, and the other two aspired to become like his disciples. Subsequently they became respectively our Teacher the Buddha Shakyamuni and his two great disciples, Shariputra and Maudgalyayana. The “power of the cause” refers to the awakening within oneself of the Mahayana lineage; the “power of the root” is the birth of compassion; the “power of listening” refers to the profound teachings; finally, “the virtuous practice” refers to the accumulation of merit. From all these is bodhichitta born. Whereas bodhichitta is considered unstable when it derives from the first strength, it is regarded as firm when it derives from the other four.
When a specific attitude of bodhichitta is generated, it is, according to Asanga and his brother Vasubandhu, a “mental factor.” On the other hand, Vimuktasena and Haribhadra believe that it is the “main mind.” The omniscient Longchenpa, for his part, says that, since it is taught that when the main mind is generated, mental factors are generated simultaneously, the former two opinions are not at variance. For their authors expressed themselves according to what they considered to be uppermost (the main mind or the mental factor). For when there is a main mind, mental factors also arise; when there are mental factors, a main mind must also occur.63
As for the defining characteristics of bodhichitta, it has two aims or features. Through compassion, it focuses on the welfare of others; through wisdom it focuses on perfect enlightenment. As it is said (in the Sutralankara), “It is a mental state endowed with two aims.” And further, “The cultivation of bodhichitta is the wish to attain perfect buddhahood for the sake of others.”
 Subtle or ultimate bodhichitta, gained through [the recognition of] ultimate reality
Subtle bodhichitta (in other words, bodhichitta that is difficult to realize) is born from the strength of meditation. Maitreya has said (in the Sutralankara):
When the perfect Buddhas have been pleased,
When the gatherings of wisdom and of merit have been made,
Then nonconceptual wisdom with regard to all phenomena
Is born, and it is known as ultimate.
Our sublime Teacher Shakyamuni delighted hundreds of perfect Buddhas, and, receiving their instructions, he amassed the supreme accumulations of merit and wisdom for one countless kalpa. It was thus that he attained supreme realization, namely, nonconceptual wisdom or knowledge with regard to all phenomena. And he beheld directly the truth of the first ground of realization.
[verse 15] Bodhichitta can be classified in other ways. For instance, it may be analyzed in terms of the first to the sixth (paramitas). In the Prajnaparamita-sutras, on the other hand, it is said that, according to the grounds of realization, there are twenty-two kinds of bodhichitta.In the Sagaramatiparipriccha-sutra, bodhichitta is classified by way of eighty unceasing factors.65
There are many such divisions, but in brief, it should be understood that bodhichitta is essentially of two kinds: bodhichitta in intention (an aspiration for supreme enlightenment) and active bodhichitta (a practical engagement in the Bodhisattva activities). [verse 16] The difference between them is like the difference between the wish to go somewhere, and actually traveling to one’s destination. It is thus that learned Bodhisattvas should understand the respective difference between bodhichitta in intention and bodhichitta in action.
Once again, there are several ways (using various examples) of explaining the difference between these two kinds of bodhichitta. Some, like the master Jnanapada, identify bodhichitta in intention with the bodhichitta of ordinary beings, and bodhichitta in action with that of beings on the noble grounds of realization. Others, like Abhaya(kara) and Jnanakirti, say that bodhichitta in intention is the bodhichitta associated with the path of accumulation, whereas bodhichitta in action is associated with the subsequent paths (from the path of joining onward). Shantipa, Ratnakara, and Sagaramegha say that a wish to attain enlightenment that is yet to be explicitly formulated in the ritual (of vow-taking) is bodhichitta in intention, while active bodhichitta comes into being when the wish is ritually expressed. For Prajnakaramati, bodhichitta in intention is a state of mind that does not eventuate in Bodhisattva activities, whereas bodhichitta in action is a state of mind that does so. According to Atisha, bodhichitta in intention focuses on the result, namely, buddhahood, while active bodhichitta focuses on the cause, namely, the path: They are defined as commitments related to the cause and to the result. Other authorities say that bodhichitta in intention is what beings may have until they reach the level from which there is no returning to samsara, whereas bodhichitta in action is what arises once this level is achievedwhich is again to say that the two bodhichittas correspond to ordinary beings and to noble beings respectively. Given these variations in interpretation, most other authorities follow the teaching of Shantideva. The omniscient Longchenpa [agrees with Atisha] in saying that the commitment to achieve the result (buddhahood) is bodhichitta in intention while the commitment to the cause is active bodhichitta. [It is said furthermore that:]
Divisions made by means of helpful images
Are all contained in action and intention.
In brief, therefore, and in accordance with the distinction between intention and practical engagement, when one says “I will free all mother sentient beings, infinite in number as the sky is vast, from all the sufferings and shortcomings of both samsara and nirvana, and I will place them in the state of utterly perfect buddhahood,” one is fervently wishing that one will also reach the resultant level of buddhahood. And one is making the pledge to do so. This is bodhichitta in intention endowed with two aims or orientations. When, after promising to undertake the path of the six paramitas (which are the cause), one engages and practices according to one’s pledge, this is active bodhichitta. But just as when one sets off on a journey, the wish to go is not discarded; in the same way, where there is active bodhichitta, bodhichitta in intention is necessarily present.
One can, from the standpoint of their different aspects, distinguish two kinds of bodhichitta, three kinds of ethical discipline, as well as the bodhichitta vows or precepts. Nevertheless, they are all one according to their nature. For example, to practice virtue while wishing to attain perfect buddhahood for the sake of others is bodhichitta both in intention and in action. To bind one’s mind with bodhichitta, to cultivate virtue, and to bring benefit to others are the three kinds of ethical discipline. And all of these restrain the negative actions and habitual tendencies of one’s mind stream and are therefore referred to as the vows or precepts of a Bodhisattva. Although these are all essentially one, they are distinguished in a threefold manner according to aspectjust as a wishing jewel can be said to possess the three qualities of curing diseases, granting all one’s needs and wishes, and shedding light in the darkness.
 The benefits of bodhichitta in intention and in action
[verse 17] Simply to engender the bodhichitta of aspiring to supreme enlightenment produces, for those who wander in samsara, an immense result in terms of power and excellence: the states of Brahma and of Indra, kings of the gods, or of a chakravartin, a sovereign of the human race.And yet a ceaseless stream of merit (in other words, the virtues of generosity, ethical discipline, and so on) does not flow from bodhichitta in intention, as it does from bodhichitta in action. [verse 18] When, however, one perfectly embraces the vow of active bodhichitta and keeps it unspoiled; when one intends never to turn away from the practice of the six paramitas but to liberate an infinity of beings from the sufferings of existence and peace and to bring them to enlightenment, [verse 19] from that moment on, the power of one’s merit constantly increases and becomes inexhaustibleeven when one is asleep, at play or in some other distracted state. It becomes as immeasurable as space itself. On the other hand, it is said that if one takes the vow of active bodhichitta but then neglects even a slight and sporadic practice of generosity and the other paramitas, not only is there no increase of merit, but the great downfall of failing to practice virtue occurs.

 Proving the benefits of bodhichitta by scripture and with reasoning

 Proving the benefits of bodhichitta by scripture
[verse 20] Whether one thinks of the number of beings who are the object of one’s concern or of the amount of their sufferings that are to be dispelled, and whether one thinks of the qualities of buddhahood to be gained or of the span of many ages required for such an accomplishment, the quantities one is dealing with are all are beyond measure. Accordingly, when the vow of active bodhichitta is taken and maintained unimpaired, the benefit that results from it is likewise immeasurable. On the basis of these four reasons, the Buddha has himself proclaimed this truth in the Subahuparipriccha-sutra. And this was not just an expedient teaching for those who only aspire to the lesser paths of the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas. The Buddha taught it precisely that they might understand and be certain about the qualities and benefits of bodhichitta.
As it is said in the above sutra, “If, for the benefit and happiness of infinite beings, I don the armor (of courage), the roots of virtue, which are forever directed at the benefit and happiness of all beings, will also be endless. They will increase and spread at all times, day and night, even when I am sleeping or being careless. It is thus that they will be perfected.”

 Proving the benefits of bodhichitta with reasoning

 Proving with reasoning the benefits of bodhichitta in intention

The karmic principle of cause and effect is an extremely hidden object of knowledge. It is therefore the exclusive domain of the omniscient Buddha. Consequently, we can only distinguish between what is to be done and what is not to be done by trusting in the pure teaching of the Conqueror, for the karmic principle cannot be demonstrated by [the unaided power of] reasoning. Nevertheless, since the Buddha repeatedly praised the immense benefits of bodhichitta, these benefits may be logically deduced and are thus established. The text therefore makes as if to supply a reasoned demonstration.67
Once upon a time, when the son of Vallabha the householderthe son who was called “Daughter”was setting off on a sea voyage in search of jewels, his mother wept and caught hold of the hem of his clothes. “Your tears,” he cried, “will bring me bad luck on the journey.” And with that, he kicked his mother in the head. In the course of his voyage, Daughter was shipwrecked, but holding fast to a spar, he was washed ashore on an island. He came to a town called Sukha and gradually moved on to other places, until finally he had to undergo the unbearable pain produced by an iron wheel spinning on his head. But then he thought to himself, “May the pain of other beings who are suffering for having kicked their mothers in the head ripen upon me. May they not experience it.” At that very moment, his torture ceased and such was his bliss that he rose up in the air to the height of seven palm trees. And after his death, he was born among the gods.68
[verse 21] If one engenders the compassionate wish to soothe, with medicines for example, the aching heads of just a few people, this altruistic wisheven if it is ineffectiveis productive of unbounded merit. [verse 22] What need is there to speak, then, of the boundless merit of the Bodhisattvas? They wish to remove the endless misery, in this and future lives, of all beings, who are as numerous as the sky is vast, bringing them immeasurable excellence both in the immediate term and on the ultimate level.
[verse 23] Nobody has good and altruistic attitudes equal to those of the Bodhisattvas, who want all beings to attain buddhahood. Even one’s father and mother do not have it (and parents are well known in the world for the kindness they show to their children, wishing them long lives free from sickness, full of strength, wealth, and influence). One could argue that this is only because of their ignorance. But even the gods, who possess the five kinds of preternatural knowledge, and even the rishis or sages, who know the eighteen great sciences, are without this attitude. Again it might be thought that their lack of bodhichitta is due to a lack of kindness. But even Brahma himself, endowed as he is with love, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity,wishing happiness and freedom from suffering for all his subjects, is without bodhichitta, the wish that they should attain buddhahood. [verse 24] Our fathers, our mothers, Brahma, or anyone else have never even dreamt of having the wish to accomplish enlightenmenteven for themselves. It is unreasonable to think that they could truly wish it for others.
[verse 25] This bodhichitta, turned as it is toward the good of all beings, which the gods and other beings do not conceive of even in their own regard let alone that of others, is the jewel of the mind. Of all thoughts it is the most precious, for it is the highest and most noble of all mental states. This truly wondrous attitude, never experienced before, now arises in the mind, thanks to hearing the teachings of the Mahayana and through the power of one’s spiritual teacher. It is as astonishing as if the wish-fulfilling tree of the celestial realm had sprouted in the human world. [verse 26] For all beings, bodhichitta is the cause of every happiness, whether in the immediate or the ultimate term. It is the great panacea, the healing draft that thoroughly dispels the sufferings and ills of every being. How can the merit or benefits of this precious, jewel-like attitude of bodhichitta be gauged or measured? For the limits of the sky, the number of beings, the number of their sorrows, and the number of the Buddhas’ qualities are all equally immeasurable. And so it is said in the Viradattagrihapatiparipriccha-sutra:
If the merit of the enlightened mind
Were to take material form,
The whole of space would be replete with it
And even then there would be more besides.

 Proving with reasoning the benefits of bodhichitta in action

It is said in the Samadhiraja-sutra:
The constant, daily worship of the supreme ones
With countless gifts of all that may be found
Within all buddhafields a hundred million strong
All this is nothing when contrasted with a loving mind!
[verse 27] If just the altruistic wish, the desire to bring happiness to others is far more noble than the offering of the seven precious attributes of royaltyand other gifts to the Buddhas, is there any need to mention the superiority of the actual practice of the six paramitas, generosity and so on, performed with the intention of bringing all beings, as infinite as space, to the true happiness of buddhahood?
[verse 28] Although beings want to free themselves from unwanted sorrows now and in the future (shortness of life, manifold illness, poverty, and so forth), their wishes and their actions are at cross-purposes. They kill, they steal, and they zealously indulge in the rest of the ten negative actions. By doing this, they hurry toward their miseries in this and future lives, like moths fluttering directly into a flame. Although they yearn for longevity and health and all other joys, they are ignorant of how to achieve them. For they have no understanding of what is to be avoided and what is to be accomplished. Not only do they fail to perform the ten positive deeds, but they commit various negativities, thereby destroying their happiness as though they regarded it as their very enemy.
[verse 29] Consequently, when those who are endowed with great love bring temporary and ultimate bliss to beings who are destitute of happiness and its causes, when with great compassion they cut away the pain and sorrow of all who are weighed down with misery and its causes, and when with wisdom they teach them what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, [verse 30] thereby remedying their ignorance of the karmic principle of cause and effectwhat other virtue could be matched in strength with theirs? What other friends could bring beings so much good, placing them in a state of happiness, dispelling their sorrows, and teaching them what to do and what not to do? What merit is there comparable to bodhichitta?
In these verses Shantideva sets forth the benefits of bodhichitta. The reason why it is important for us to know about them is that if we actually have the thought that, come what may, we must give rise to bodhichitta both in ourselves and others, we will yearn for whatever will engender it wherever it has been previously absent. And we will intensify it where it has arisen, without ever letting it decline. When we have such an interest and longing, so great that none can prevent itlike hungry and thirsty people craving food and waterthis is truly the result of understanding the benefits of bodhichitta. On the other hand, it has been said that simply to have an intellectual knowledge of all this and to explain it to others is of no help whatsoever. We must train our minds in bodhichitta over and over again.

 The greatness of a person who possesses bodhichitta

[verse 31] Those who acknowledge and repay the good that others have done to them in the past through the gift of such things as food or money are considered in this world to be worthy of praise. For as the saying goes:
Honor and protection stay close by
The man who recognizes and repays the favors done to him.

Those who show their gratitude are protected by the gods themselves, and they possess other great excellent attributes. This being so, what shall we say of the Bodhisattvas, who do good where no good has been done to them before and who strive only in the means to achieve the benefit of beings both now and in future lives, without ever being asked? What need is there to say that they are worthy of offerings and praise?
[verse 32] As the saying goes, “Know the meaning through examples.” And indeed the meaning of anything is grasped more easily through such expedients. We may imagine therefore someone supplying food on a regular basis for, let us say, a year or month or just a day to a restricted group of people (a hundred or a thousand, who thus constitute a limited or inferior object of generosity). The period of time in which the act is performed is likewise inferior; it is the time it takes to complete the act of giving. The thing given is also inferior, for this is only a little food, and no great gift. We may imagine too that the act is performed in a disdainful manner, striking and hitting the beneficiaries, and is thus an inferior mode of giving. Finally, the benefit itself is inferior for the people in question are nourished for only half a day. Even so, many people in this world will consider such a donor to be worthy of praise and honor. “How virtuous,” they will say, “to make such charitable donations!”
[verse 33] The gift bestowed by the Bodhisattvas, on the other hand, is not to just a few, but to all beings, the number of which is as infinite as the vastness of space. Their act of giving is not briefly done but lasts long, indeed until the very emptying of samsara. Their gift is no meager pittance, but the unsurpassable bliss of buddhahood, and their mode of giving is marked by serenity and devotion. Finally, the benefit involved is not small but thoroughly outstanding, seeing that it is the fulfillment of all wishes and is bestowed continuously and without interruption. What need then is there to say that the Bodhisattvas are generous benefactors worthy of respect and praise?
[verse 34] The Buddha has said that all those who have evil thoughts in their minds against the Bodhisattvas described above (sovereigns of generosity, who bestow on beings the state of buddhahood) and all those who do no more than wish that something unfortunate might happen to them (to say nothing of actual physical or verbal aggression), will remain in hell in great torment for aeons equal to the moments of their malice. And here, a moment is to be understood as the shortest possible unit, corresponding to one sixty-fourth of the time it takes for a strong man to snap his fingers. It is written in the Prashantavinishchaya-pratiharya-sutra, “Bodhisattva Manjushri, be forearmed! Those who show anger or contempt toward a Bodhisattva will have to stay in hell for as many kalpas as the number of their states of malice!”
[verse 35] By contrast, when one simply gazes upon the face of a Bodhisattva with an attitude of joy and sincere devotion, the effects are incalculable. One will have the joy of the gods of Tushita for more kalpas than there are instants of one’s gazing. The outcome is even greater than the result of malevolence. As it is written in the Niyataniyatagatimudravatara-sutra, “Manjushri, if, for the sake of argument, all the beings of the entire universes of the ten directions were to lose their eyes and my noble sons and daughters, with their loving thoughts, were to cause them to grow again, even such merit, O Manjushri, would be unequal to that of my noble sons and daughters who watch with faith and devotion the Bodhisattva devoted to the Mahayana. For the merit engendered thereby is indeed beyond counting.”
Even in times of famine; even when there is a dearth of clothing and possessions; even when there is loss of life of human beings and animals; even when there is disease, harm by negative forces, enemies and spirits, in all such terrible conditions, the Bodhisattvas, the offspring of the Buddha, are people for whom bad omens turn to good and for whom adversity becomes a friend. Such difficulties are no hindrance to their Dharma practice. Not only do they not give rise to evil deeds, but such troubles become a means for them to purify past evils and are an encouragement to virtuous actions. Positive attitudes, such as love, compassion, and the determination to abandon samsara, will naturally increase, as illustrated in the story of Prince Danarata and King Manichuda. On the other hand, Bodhisattvas who are without much courage and who are unskilled in means are unable to bear even the slightest difficulties. As the saying goes:
When sun is warm and stomach full,
You look like a practitioner.
When setbacks and hard times befall,
You’re really very ordinary!

On the other hand, for those whose minds are stable and who are skilled in means, it is as Asanga has said:
Even when the world is full of evil
They turn hardship into the enlightened path.

Accordingly, when illness and sorrow, enemies and evil spirits and all such harms arise, if you do not fall beneath their power, they become an assistance on the path to enlightenment. They are like the wind, which can blow out a flame or cause a forest fire to blaze.
[verse 36] Shantideva pays respectful homage in thought, word, and deed to everyone, whether of high or low estate, in whose mind the precious mind of enlightenment has arisen, the state of mind that of all others is most sacredthe wish to dispel all the drawbacks of both existence and peace. And as the saying goes:
When links are good, in one life buddhahood.
When links are bad, samsara has an end.

Even when Bodhisattvas are attacked and reviled, it is through the strength of their compassion, bodhichitta, skillful means, and prayers of aspiration, that they forge links that connect their attackers with happiness both in the immediate and ultimate term. And they help them to attain it. This is illustrated by the story of the sage Kshantivadin and the king Maitribala.Shantideva therefore takes refuge in the Bodhisattvas. For they are supreme beings, the source of happiness in this and future lives. Any kind of relationship with them is always beneficial. We should do as Shantideva does. We should make prostrations to the Bodhisattvas, the children of the Buddhas, and take refuge in them.
It may be thought that it is contradictory to say, on the one hand, that an evil intention against a Bodhisattva will lead to birth in hell, and to say, on the other, that even if one harms a Bodhisattva, one will be joined with happiness. But this is not so. The former statement is made from the point of view of the ineluctable karmic law of cause and effect, on account of which the evil attitude will give the immediate result of birth in an infernal existence. The latter statement takes into account the fact that the compassion of the Bodhisattvas, and their skillful means deployed through bodhichitta, together with the strength of their powerful prayers, afford protection and care even for beings who afflict harm on them.
The principal reason for acquainting oneself with the qualities of those who have bodhichitta in their minds is that one will then confess all the faults of thought, word, and deed that one has formerly committed against the Bodhisattvas. One will refrain from such faults in the future and take the Bodhisattvas as one’s refuge. This in effect is what the result should be. On the other hand, simply to know about all this and to explain it to others is of no avail. It is vital to take all this to heart and to meditate on it.
It is generally said that Tibet is the field of the benevolent activity of the noble and compassionate Avalokiteshvara and that Tibetans belong to the lineage of the Mahayana. And on the whole, there is no one there nowadays who has not received an empowerment. They are consequently Bodhisattvas, worthy of the homage of both gods and humankind, and are thus an exceptional people endowed with many qualities.Indeed they are the Buddhas of the future. Consequently, if one has entertained wrong ideas about them in the past, imputing faults and imperfections to them that they do not have, while denying the qualities that they possess, one should confess this and resolve never to repeat such an action. Henceforth, one should train in pure vision in their regard, pay them respect, and take refuge in them.73
It is said in the sutras moreover that, in the age of decadence, Bodhisattvas may make mistakes when they relate with other people. It is therefore important not to dwell on the faults of others, but to train in pure perception of them. It is said, furthermore, that we should revere the Bodhisattvas, imitating the brahmins of India who, taking the moon as their deity, venerate it while it is waxing, but not when it is full. Even if Bodhisattvas do have faults, they will nevertheless become Buddhas. Their faults, after all, are compounded phenomena and will consequently be worn away by dint of practicing the path. Nobody becomes enlightened by being faultless from the beginning. It is therefore said that to avoid dwelling on the defects and faults of others is a most important pith instruction.
This ends the first chapter from the Bodhicharyavatara, called “The Excellence and Benefits of Bodhichitta.”