CONFESSION OF NEGATIVITY

The making of offerings

Material offerings

The offering of one’s possessions

Precious bodhichitta, which is endowed with such extraordinary qualities, does not arise in the absence of causes and conditions. All the causes for it must be complete. In this respect, the lord Nagarjuna says that bodhichitta occurs when the accumulation of merit is fulfilled. Asanga, for his part, says that it arises in a pure and limpid mind. Now the best of all ways of accumulating merit is to make offerings; moreover, the laying out of perfect offerings has the effect of rendering one’s mind pure and limpid as well. Once, when the Tibetans asked the peerless lord Atisha for the vow of bodhichitta, he instructed them to prepare offerings. They did so, but Atisha found the offerings insufficient and refused to give the vow. Again the Tibetans prepared offerings and again Atisha refused. Finally, when they had laid out offerings on a far grander scale, Atisha said that they were just sufficient and gave the vow. It is clear that offerings are extremely important. Indeed, it is said that all one’s possessions should be divided into three. One part should be set aside for one’s subsistence and the other two should be used as offerings to the Three Jewels.
The offerings in question should be made in accordance with the “three purities.” First, one’s motivation should be pure. [verse 1] In other words, one makes the offerings in order to gain or generate precious bodhichitta in the mind. Second, the object or field of offering should be pure. The offerings are made to the Bhagavan Buddhas, those who have “thus gone,” that is, those who have proceeded in accordance with ultimate reality. Likewise offerings are made to the stainless, supremely rare Jewel of the sacred Dharma, which is the truth of the path, delivering us from attachment, and also the truth of cessation, the state of freedom. As it is said [in the Uttaratantra-shastra]:
Freedom from attachment and the freeing from the same,
The Dharma has the nature of two truths.
Deliverance from attachment in itself includes
Cessation and the truth of path.
Finally, one makes offerings to the Bodhisattvas, the Buddha’s offspring, who possess boundless, ocean-like qualities. On gaining the first ground of realization, for example, Bodhisattvas possess twelve groups of qualities, each group consisting of a hundred qualities. On the second ground, they possess twelve groups of a thousand qualities. And so on.
The third purity is that of the offering substances themselves. An excellent offering is one of good provenance and of immaculate quality, well-prepared or well-arranged. Good provenance means that the offerings have not been procured through wrong livelihood or evil actions. The offerings are of immaculate quality because they are clean, because they are offered without pride or ostentation, and because they are not spoiled by niggardliness and reluctance.If we offer the best of what we haveof all that we hold most dear and rarethe offering itself acts as an antidote to avarice. If, on the other hand, we make offerings of things like moldy cheese, plants with withered leaves, and so on, our merit will diminish. This therefore is something to be avoided. Finally, the offerings should be well-arranged. The seven offering bowls should be clean and properly filledset out evenly and in an orderly fashion. If they are insufficiently filled with water or grains, this will lead to poverty. If they overflow, our discipline will go astray. If the offered water is spilled, tumors will result, and so on. The preparation and arrangement of offerings should be free of all such faults.

The offering of things unowned

This refers to the offering of all the wonderful riches and commodities that we see or hear about in all the reaches of the universe spreading out in the ten directions. It is enough simply to offer them mentally, by recalling them or bringing their names and appearances to mind. Thus we can offer [verse 2] all the flowerswhite lotuses, mandarava, and blue utpalasthat grow in the streams and meadows of the pure buddhafields or in the heavens of the gods, the lands of the nagas, and the human realms. To these are added all the fruits and grains that exist: the bilwa fruit, the mango, barley, rice, wheat, and so on. Bezoar, the best and most potent of medicines, is also offered, together with the six excellent substancesand other things such as medicinal substances, stones, herbs, and roots. We can make an offering of all the precious jewels to be found in world: the precious wish-fulfilling gem, which satisfies every need and desire, lapis lazuli, sapphire, and so forth.
And as it is said in the sutra:
Cool and tasty, light and soft,
Limpid water, free from all impurity
When drunk, it does not harm the stomach
And to the throat it does no injury.
We can offer water endowed with these eight fine qualities, such as the waters of Lake Neverwarm, together with the great rivers that spill from it in the four directionsthe Ganges to the east, the Sindhu to the south, the Vakshu to the west, and the Sita to the north, as well as the waters of the seven seas of enjoyment.The peerless Atisha indeed spoke of the excellence of the water of Tibet, saying that the offering of it alone was enough to accumulate merit. [verse 3] We can offer Mount Meru, the king of mountains, composed of four precious substances, as well as the seven ranges of golden mountains and all the other peaks. We can offer all forest glades, pleasant solitudes encircled by groves of sandal trees, sweet and lonely places that are as clean as a mandala of turquoise and adorned with every kind of flower, places that are unfrequented by day and silent by night.
We can also offer trees garlanded with different-colored blossoms, beautiful like jeweled ornaments; and all kinds of fruit trees and vines with branches bending under the weight of their many delicious fruits and grapes perfect in color, fragrance, and taste. [verse 4] We can offer the scent of sandalwood and all the sweet-smelling trees to be found in the human world, as well as in the realms of the gods and the nagas. We can offer the natural incense of aloe, as well as perfumes contrived with human skill, and likewise every wish-granting tree, such as the celestial parijata, which satisfies every desire, together with the precious trees of Sukhavati, composed as they are of gold and other of the seven precious minerals. We can also offer the many harvests of crops like salu rice, which grow without the land being ploughed or the seed being sown, and everything else that is worthy to be offered but cannot be individually named. [verse 5]
Again, we can offer the four famous lakesand immaculate turquoise meres adorned with lotuses of five different colors. We can offer the many lesser stretches of water embellished with lilies and resonant with the sweet and plaintive cries of waterbirds, swans and geese, with exquisite plumage of different colorswhite as conch, yellow as gold, red as coral, and blue as turquoise. We can offer the brilliant light of the sun and moon rising in the east, the sweet fragrance of incense coming from the sandal groves in the south, the divine white butter offerings of the snowy mountains in the west, the blue cascading water, sparkling and pure in the north. And everything else, whatever there is.
These offerings, the flowers and all the rest, have four features in common. First, they are infinite in quantity, extending to the very limits of space. Second, they are untainted by negativity, for they are owned by no one, like the wealth and possessions of the people of Uttarakuru.[verse 6] Third, they are offered in the imagination, keeping them before the mind. In other words, we act as if they were our own property and offer them without reserve. Fourth, they are offered to the Lord Buddha, the Powerful Sage, who, accompanied by his Bodhisattva children, is able to act spontaneously and unguardedly in body, speech, and mind,and who is the most valiant of all the six classes of beings and the greatest of the human race. Moreover, the offering is well-made with the intention that precious bodhichitta take birth in the mind. And even if the offerings are modest, they give a great result, for the Buddhas are their perfect recipients. This is illustrated by the story of Mandhata, who became a chakravartin because he made an offering to a Buddha of only seven peas, or by the story of Ashoka, whose dignity as a Dharma king was due to the fact that he had [in a previous life] placed a handful of sand in the Buddha’s begging bowl. This is why in the root text Shantideva prays to the Lords of Compassion, the sublime recipients of his offerings, who are without deceit and guile and are unchanging in their desire to help beings, that they might think lovingly of him and accept his gifts.
[verse 7] What is the purpose for the sort of offerings just described? Shantideva explains that he is destitute of merit, which results from generosity and other virtues performed in the past. For this reason he is poor in his present life and is, as it were, the least among beggars. Apart from the items just described, he has nothing fit to offer. He therefore prays that his offerings be acceptable to the Buddhas our Protectors and their Bodhisattva heirs. From the first moment that they generated bodhichitta, they havefree from any kind of self-regardthought only of how they might be of help to beings. They wish only that beings fufill the two accumulations of wisdom and merit and purify defilements. Shantideva prays that, though they are free from clinging to the reality of things and have no needs of any kind, they might, through their miraculous powers and from their pure abodes, accept these offerings of all things wild and unowned, and that they might do so in order to allow him to purify defilement and accumulate merit. If, in our turn, we are able to make offerings in this way, it follows that, since the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas have wisdom and compassionate skill and are masters of inconceivable miraculous powers, they will also accept our oblation, thereby allowing us to fulfill our stock of merit and to cleanse our defilements.

The offering of one’s body

[verse 8] To the Buddhas, the Victorious Lords, who have vanquished the four demons,and to the host of their Bodhisattva offspring, Shantideva, henceforth and for all his lives to come, makes a constant and uninterrupted offering of his own body, which is so dear and necessary to him. He begs the supreme heroes, the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, the lords of the three lineages and so forth, to accept him completely and to adopt him as their own. Having thus become their respectful subject in body, speech, and mind, he pledges himself to fulfill their wishes. [verse 9] Now that they have fully accepted him as one of their servants and have made him their own, Shantideva promises that he will act according to their pleasure. For, although he is himself still in samsara, he will work for the benefit of others, undaunted by the sufferings of existence. He promises to accomplish the welfare and happiness of beings. But seeing that any negative action that he has committed is prejudicial to the good name and reputation of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and since (on account of his sins) he is powerless to accomplish even his own good, let alone that of others, he confesses all the evil of his past and resolves henceforth to abstain from it. In fact, it has been said that the offering of one’s own body is the best way to protect oneself [from the results of former evil].

Offerings manifested by the power of the mind

The offering of a ceremonial bath

This offering is made in accordance with the secular customs of ancient India and consists of the kind of ablutions performed before and after meals. It includes bathing the feet of one’s guests, offering them perfume, and adorning their heads with garlands of flowers. As a means to purify himself and others, cleansing the impurities of thought, word, and deed, Shantideva offers a bathing ceremony to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, even though the latter are themselves quite unstained by any defilement. [verse 10] In the space before him, Shantideva imagines one or more bathing chambers, excellently perfumed with sandal, camphor, and the like. The floor is composed of five kinds of crystal, pure and transparent, beautifully wrought with inlaid patterns, sparkling and brilliant. Its surface is smooth and its draining conduits have been sealed with plugs. Four graceful pillars, colored according to the four cardinal directions, ablaze with the variegated shimmer of seven kinds of precious stone and crystal, are connected at their base by a low wall, reaching to the level of a man’s waist, the purpose of which is to retain the water. Above this are four railings, and the whole is surmounted by a ceiling, its inner surface adorned with gleaming canopies of five sorts of pearl and other jewels, as well as banners, parasols, victory banners, pennants, silken frills, and pendant strings, whereby the whole is rendered extremely beautiful. The ceiling opens upward in the center, and above it, supported by small pillars, is a Chinese-style roof, adorned with a wishing-jewel as its crowning ornament.
Shantideva imagines that within these chambers thrones made of precious stones have been set in place. [verse 11] The Buddhas then arrivethe Tathagatas (those who have “proceeded in accordance with ultimate reality”). Although their minds never waver from the wisdom of the dharmakaya, they nevertheless appear according to the needs of beings in the rupakaya, or body of form, the illusory display of primordial wisdom. Accompanied by the infinite hosts of Bodhisattvas, they hang their garments on the railings just described.
Then, visualizing himself either in his own form or in the form of emanated offering goddesses, Shantideva clothes the Buddhas in the translucent white bathing robes that he has offered. With tilted vesselslarge, exquisite vases of lapis lazuli and other precious substances, two-thirds filled with water fragrant with cleansing unguents and perfumehe bathes the Buddhas. All the while, offering goddesses of ravishing beauty positioned on the radiant terraces outside the bathing chamber, sing melodious prayers and praises celebrating the high deeds of the Buddhas, accompanied by other goddesses on flute and drum. This then is the offering of the bathing ceremony. When the plugs are drawn, it is imagined that the bathing waters stream down from the sky and cleanse away all the evil deeds and defilements of beings, oneself and others, who are beneath. In particular, this water pacifies all the evil intentions and violent wickedness of the local gods, owners of the groundall spirits and bloodthirsty demons, and all evil forces that are the source of epidemic diseases, thereby bringing to an end the illnesses of both human beings and animals. And one then imagines that precious bodhichitta takes birth in their minds.
[verse 12] Then with immaculate cloths of unexampled quality, heavenly fabrics and Benares silk, with towels perfumed with sweet-smelling medicinal talc, Shantideva dries the bodies of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. All these garments, bathing robes, and drying cloths now transform into a red light of blessings and accomplishments and dissolve into the foreheads of himself and others, specifically in the place between the eyebrows.With such a thought it is understood that all the qualities of primordial wisdom have been gained. Once their bodies have been dried, offerings are made to the nirmanakaya Buddhas (who assume the demeanor of monks) of all the accoutrements of renunciants: the thirteen articles of ordained livelihood,such as the three Dharma robes, well-dyed with the three permitted colors of red, blue, and saffron. Hundreds of thousands of such precious and scented robes are offered. [verse 13] To the sambhogakayas, who appear in the guise of chakravartins and who are given to the enjoyment of pleasures, offerings are made of incomparable vestments of celestial and priceless materials, extremely fine, light, and soft to the touch, in various colors and designsall in all, the five silken garments: the short-sleeved garment that can bestow upon the body the bliss of samadhi, the upper garment of white silk wrought with golden traceries, the many-colored lower garment, the pendants of different silks, and a sash (there may also be a silken shawl instead of the short-sleeved shirt). When making this offering of raiment, one should wish that all beings, oneself and others, be clothed with a sense of moral conscience regarding their own conduct and the opinion and feelings of others. As for ornaments and jewels, the eight precious adornmentsthe golden diadem inlaid with lapis lazuli and so forth; earrings; the short, medium, and long necklaces; bracelets; anklets; and beltsare offered many a hundredfold. With such as these, one adorns the noble Samantabhadra, Manjughosha, Avalokita Lord of the World, together with all the others: Vajrapani, Kshitigarbha, Maitreya, Akashagarbha, and Sarvanivaranavishkambhin. So doing, one should wish that all beings be graced with the major and minor marks of enlightenment.

Offerings of pleasant substances

In the Abhidharmakosha we find the following:
The universe consisting of four continents, of sun and moon,
Of Meru and the heavens of the gods,
Of realms of both desire and of pure form,
All this increased a thousand times defines the chiliocosm.
This multiplied a thousand times is the dichiliocosm
And as an intermediary universe has been described.
And this once more a thousand times increased is the trichiliocosm.
[verse 14] With vessels made of precious jewels, of conch or mother-ofpearl, filled with the cool-scented water of white sandal and other exquisite perfumes that penetrate even the boundless reaches of a thousand million worlds, the offering goddesses anoint the bodies of the Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas. The forms of the latter shine like pure gold sixteen times refined (its brilliance intensified by various agents and burnished with a cloth of silk). Being lustrous in themselves, they radiate their light upon all that surrounds them. It is thus that Shantideva says that he too will anoint them, so that not the slightest blemish appears. Reflecting in the same way, we should form the wish that all beings, ourselves and others, acquire the golden skin that is a mark of buddhahood.
[verse 15] Before the Buddhas, Lords of Sages, who are the supreme recipients of offering, ravishing blossoms of perfect shape and hue are placed: the celestial mandarava, the lotus and utpala of the divine and human realms, together with all the brilliant, perfumed flowers that are to be found in the realms of gods, nagas, and human beings, as well as in the pure fields. Tossed into the sky, they take the form of palaces, canopies, banners and parasols, victory banners and mandalasand all this is offered to the nirmanakaya Buddhas appearing in monastic guise. Flowers come showering down and go blowing in the wind as offerings to all the Buddhas of the ten directions. To the sambhogakaya Buddhas (appearing in the aspect of those who are given to enjoyment) garlands are offered made of five kinds of flowers, worked and expertly twisted together as though by skilled garland makers, together with other adornments. As we make such offerings, we too should wish that all beings, oneself and others, flourish with the blossoms of the seven elements that lead to enlightenment.83
[verse 16] Billowing clouds of the choicest incense are offered to the Buddhas and their Bodhisattva childrenserpent-heart sandalwood, black akaru and the like, natural or manufactured, filling the whole of space in all directions, the merest scent of which ravishes the mind. These clouds of burning incense, whether in sticks or powder, which take the shape of seed-syllables or the seven attributes of royalty, are borne on the wind in the ten directions and all is respectfully offered as a pleasing oblation to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. Here the wish is made that this perfume might dispel the distress of beings and fill them with joy and that the minds of all beings, ourselves and others, be permeated with the fragrance of ethical discipline so pleasing to the enlightened ones. In addition, the best food is also offered: rice of a hundred savors and other dishes, drafts of nectar, the three white and the three sweet substances, and every delicacy contrived of perfect-tasting, aromatic ingredients. It is food worthy of a divine being (which in the present context means a king), prepared in water that is fresh and unsullied. In brief, an offering is made of all the food and drink that one could possibly desire. The Buddhas’ begging bowls are filled with it and likewise all the jeweled dishes, plates, and other vessels. Thinking thus we make the wish that all beings, ourselves and others, acquire the supreme food of concentration.
[verse 17] A mental offering is made of the light of precious lamps of lapis lazuli, set within a host of beautiful, well-positioned lotuses all contrived of the purest gold, illuminating the whole world by day and by night. Each will be offered one by one, every lamp visualized as being as large as the three-thousandfold universe, its wick as high as Mount Meru, its molten butter as vast as the sea, its five-hued light filling the whole of space. And one makes the wish that, thanks to this offering, the darkness of all beings (their ignorance of the nature of phenomena) be dissipated and that the supreme light of omniscient wisdom be gained. Upon the even jeweled pavement, which has a checkered design and is soft and yielding to the step, and which is impregnated with sweet perfume to the thickness of an ox’s hide, a carpet of ravishingly beautiful flowers is scattered, lying flat and even (without their stalks protruding) on the ground. Making such an offering, we should formulate the wish that all beings, ourselves and others, generate bodhichitta with an intent as immovable as the earth itself.
[verse 18] Palaces are offered that are incalculable in size, spaciousness, and design. They are made of jewels and constructed on five hundred different levels. Moreover, inside and on their outside terraces, offering goddesses sing melodious praises and play upon the lute and other instruments. These residences are adorned with loops and pendant strings of rosy pearls and other precious gems, which hang from the mouths of ornamental lions and sea creatures set upon the pillars both inside and outside the building. All these pendant ornaments are ravishingly beautiful; they sparkle with a myriad lights and are adorned with tassels, tiny bells and mirrors, with which the extremities of the strings of pearls are likewise decorated. The mirrors reflect, and the tinkling bells describe, the lives and exploits of the Bodhisattvas.
From the sandalwood spouts located at the corners of the roof, there flows a stream of scented water that collects in pools where various waterbirds play and sweetly sing. In certain of the palace halls, garments are laid out, in others, refreshments of food and drink. There are thrones and seats to sit on during the day, divans to sleep upon at night. They are piled high with many-colored cushions and pillows of heavenly fabrics together with every kind of precious accoutrement. Both by day and by night, jeweled lamps shed their radiance, shining in all directions, their light extending to the infinite reaches of space. They are thus the very ornaments of the sky. All this is offered to the compassionate Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas. Thinking thus we too should make the wish that, together with all other beings, we might reach the city of liberation.
[verse 19] Offerings are made of lovely parasols contrived of celestial silks and precious gems, golden shafts and exquisite jeweled fringes, unending knots, loops, and pendants. These are beautifully formed and delightful to behold. They are held aloft and carried around by offering goddesses, wise horses, and elephants. All these are constantly offered to all the Buddhas and their Bodhisattva children, just as in the past when Brahma, standing to the right of our compassionate Teacher, offered him five hundred parasols of lapis lazuli, while Indra, on the left, offered him five hundred parasols of the best refined gold. When the offering is complete, we too should make the wish that all beings, ourselves and others, be protected from the heat and vexation of samsara and the lower realms and that we all come beneath the cooling shade of the Three Jewels and the protection they bestow. We should consider that this twelvefold offering visualized by the mind pervades the three-thousandfold universe, even though such thoughts exceed the minds’ imagination.
Shantideva himself was a yogi whose spiritual practice and manner of life were of an extreme simplicity. He did not teach extensively about actual material offerings. Offerings imagined by the mind, on the other hand, are the best way to complete the great accumulation of merit without difficulty. Such is the offering of a Bodhisattva skilled in means. We should therefore refrain from thinking that such offerings are unimportant and instead meditate upon them repeatedly. It is not necessary, however, to concentrate upon them uninterruptedly as we do with a yidam deity. If we hold the offerings to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas before our minds for brief moments, it is not necessary to labor hard and exhaust ourselves in order to gather a great stock of merit. Thus the accumulations will be complete, defilements will be purified, and bodhichitta will arise in our minds. We will understand the teachings and remember them, and every other excellent quality will arise. It is important therefore to visualize all such offerings repeatedly, for this is of the greatest benefit and is easy to do. It is said that if we make such offerings, they are more vast and pure than any other offering deriving from wrong livelihood and negative actions, or from offerings made with pride and ostentation.

Offerings made through the power of aspiration

[verse 20] In addition, we should imagine that innumerable other magnificent offerings arise in the presence of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and remain uninterruptedly: the music of all sorts of wind and percussion instruments, such as cymbals endowed with eight qualities and so on, or the sweet music of the lute like that of Druma-kinnara (which sent even Mahakashyapahelplessly a-dancing). And there are other entrancing sounds like the strumming of the tamboura of Prabha (king of gandharvas) and clouds of music, of dance, and of tuneful songs of praisemusic the mere hearing of which can soothe the troubles of beings and inspire them with happiness. “Cloud” here has the connotation of something vast. We therefore make the wish that unbounded clouds of sweet melody, spreading to the ten directions, be constantly present before the Buddhas and their Bodhisattva children.
[verse 21] We then imagine that a shower of jewels and flowers and every precious thing falls unceasingly upon the Jewel of the sacred Dharma of transmission and realization, including all the volumes of the scriptures. It is said in fact that when the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas teach the Dharma, there falls a rain of flowersa phenomenon called the “miracle occurring when the Dharma appears.” Therefore let a rain of flowers fall whenever the teachings of transmission are given and received! Moreover, just as it is said that when the Buddha, the Blessed One, achieved perfect enlightenment, the gods of the Heaven of the Purecaused a rain of flowers to fall, so too, whenever the Dharma of realization arises in the mind, may there fall a rain of flowers. Let it also fall upon all the supports of offering, such as stupas, the representations of the dharmakaya.
There are eight kinds of stupa, corresponding to the eight great deeds of the Tathagata. First, when our Teacher was born, Shuddhodana the king caused the Stupa of Heaped Lotuses to be built in Kapila. Second, at the time of the Buddha’s enlightenment, the Stupa of Subjugation of Demons, otherwise known as the Stupa of Enlightenment, was constructed by Bimbisara and others. Third, when the Buddha turned the wheel of Dharma, his first five disciples built the Stupa of Many Auspicious Doors at Varanasi. Fourth, when the Buddha subdued the six non-Buddhist teachers, the Licchavis built the Stupa of Miracles in Jeta Grove. Fifth, when, after instructing his mother in the Heaven of the Thirty-three, the Buddha returned to the human realm at a place called Shankhashya, the local people erected the Stupa of the Descent from the Heavens. Sixth, when the Buddha repaired a schism in the sangha, the Stupa of Reconciliation was constructed in Venu Grove. Seventh, when the Buddha blessed the composite of his bodily form (in order to extend his lifespan), the Stupa of Victory was built by the Malla people in Vaishali. Eighth, the Parinirvana Stupa was erected, also by the Malla people, in Kushinagar.
As mentioned in the Bhadrakalpita-sutra, the relics of the Tathagata spread. Stupas were accordingly made for the Buddha’s four canine teethone by Brahma, one by a naga living beneath the city of Rarok, another by the king of Kalinka, and yet another by the gandharvas of the city of Fair Gandhara. Eight stupas and other shrines were erected to house the eight large Magadha bushels that remained of the Tathagata’s relics, as well as for his clothes, those that were burned and those that remained unburned. The Dharma king Ashoka accomplished the ordinary siddhi of bringing the yakshas or harmful spirits under his power, and, in a million locations in this world, caused a million stupas to be built containing the Buddha’s relics. The bhikshu Akarmatishila, an emanation of the Dharma king Songtsen Gampo, brought relics of the Buddha from the Stupa of Heaped Lotuses in India. These relics are at present preserved between the eyebrows of the image [of Avalokiteshvara] called “Jowo Rangjung Ngaden.” From this same stupa, Guru Rinpoche, the second Buddha from Oddiyana, transported by means of his miraculous power a full measure of relics that are now reposing in the white stupa of Samye. These relics are multiplying, and they can be found by fortunate beings even now.
May the rain of flowers fall upon all painted images and statues, be they cast in metal or carved in relief, such as the first picture ever made of the Tathagata, namely, the image “Created by Rays of Light,” which gave teachings and brought the Singhalese maiden Vine of Pears to the realization of the truth [of the path of seeing]. May flowers fall upon the Buddha images made of precious gems by Vishvakarman, king of sculptorsfor instance the one that depicts the Buddha at the age of twenty-five, now in the celestial realm of Tushita, the statue of the Jowo Rinpoche Shakyamuni showing him at the age of twelve, and the image called Jowo Mikyö Dorje preserved in the Ramoche, which depicts him at the age of eight (the latter two statues are now in Lhasa and the Jowo made of sandalwood by Vishvakarman is currently in China). According to the Vajrayana of the Secret Mantra, it is said that three things manifest when the Great Perfection teachings arise. The representation of the enlightened body is the self-arisen image of Vajradhara contrived of one hundred and one precious stones. The representation of the enlightened speech is the tantra entitled The One and Only Son of the Doctrine.The representation of the enlightened mind is the five-pronged vajra, a cubit in size, made either of one hundred and one precious jewels or of gold. These objects appear in the sky above the twelve placesand other abodes where the teachings of the Great Perfection are propagated.
We should then make the wish that a rain of gems, flowers, perfumes, various garments, ornaments, grains, and medicines fall in an unceasing stream of offering upon all these representations. If our ethical discipline is pure, we will certainly accomplish all our aspirations. And even if this does not happen, we will be benefited.

The unsurpassable offering

The Bodhisattva Samantabhadra emanated from his heart hundreds of thousands of millions of many-colored lights, equal in number to the grains of dust in unnumbered buddhafields. At the end of each ray, he again visualized a form of himself and from the heart of each emanation, the same number of light rays were projected with another emanation of himself appearing at the end of each until they became unimaginably countless, with each emanation making an inconceivable array of offerings to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of the ten directions. Such is Samantabhadra’s “cloud of offerings.” [verse 22] And just as Manjughosha, Samantabhadra, and the other Bodhisattvas residing on the tenth ground of realization made offerings in infinite clouds of emanated gifts to the Buddhas of the ten directions, in the same way, we should aspire to make offerings to the Tathagatas our Protectors and to their Bodhisattva children. As it is said in the Ratnolka-sutra:
Flowers everywhere and canopies of flowers,
Flowers radiating myriads of beams
Of every kind and color I spread out
And offer to the Buddhas and their Bodhisattva children.
Moreover, since cultivation of bodhichitta, meditation on compassion, remembering the words, and understanding the meaning, of the Dharma are themselves unsurpassable offerings, we should persevere in them.

The offering of melodious praise

[verse 23] To those who are endowed with excellent qualities as abundant as the ocean, namely the Buddhas, whose bodies are adorned with the major and minor marks of enlightenment, whose speech is as melodious as the voice of Brahma, and whose minds are omniscient wisdomto them and to their Bodhisattva offspring, Shantideva says that he will offer tuneful praises in the six methods of vocalization: rising, pausing, changing, slurring, high, and lowand any number of other ways. And he prays that clouds of tuneful eulogy rise up constantly and without fail before the Victorious ones and their Bodhisattva children.

An act of veneration

[verse 24] To the Bhagavan Buddhas of the past, present, and future, dwelling in infinite buddhafields in the ten directions, to the sublime Dharma of transmission and realization, and to the supreme Sangha, the assembly of those aspiring to virtue, who never forsake it once it has been gained, Shantideva prostrates, imagining that he has as many bodies as there are motes of dust in the universes of the ten directions. He reverently places his joined palms to the three places and stretches his body on the ground or touches it with his five limbs (hands, knees, and forehead). With devotion he recites the words of homage and respectfully recalls to mind the majestic qualities of the Three Jewels.
[verse 25] In the same way, we too bow down to what is referred to as the support of bodhichitta, that is, images of the Buddhas, collections of the Mahayana scriptures, the places where the Teacher was born and so on, the places where bodhichitta is cultivated, and all the places where the Dharma is proclaimed and heard. We bow to stupas and whatever representations of the enlightened body, speech, and mind exist. Likewise, we bow down to all teachers: preceptors who teach and transmit the pratimoksha vows (of individual liberation), those who give reading transmissions, and those who instruct the bhikshus and shramaneras,and even those who teach people how to read and so forth. We bow down to the supreme Dharma practitioners who have put their old ways behind them and embraced a new way of life: to the sangha of the yogis, white-robed and long-haired, as well as to the sangha of the saffron-robed renunciants, and even to those who merely assume the outward demeanor of Buddha’s disciples. With perfect devotion and respect in thought, word, and deed we bow down to them all. Of the different kinds of homage (physical, verbal, and mental), it is the mental homage that is the most important. Consequently, one prostration performed with an undistracted mind is much more effective and of much greater benefit than many prostrations performed while one is chatting and looking around.
When the bodily posture is straight, the subtle channels are also straight, as are also the wind-energies and the mind. Therefore, with these four items straight, we should visualize our father on our right, our mother on our left, our enemies and obstacle-makers in front, and on all sides beings as numerous as the particles of dust upon the face of the earth. All of them are holding a jewel between their reverently joined hands. It is said in the Mahamoksha-sutra:
Like an opening lotus bud,
Join your hands above your head.
Then, as we place our hands successively to the crown of our heads, to our throats, and to our hearts, we call to mind the qualities of the body, speech, and mind of the Tathagatas, and as we prostrate to them, we make the wish that beings purify their physical, verbal, and mental defilements and gain the invisible ushnisha upon their heads, the Dharma-conch of enlightened speech, and the unending knot of the enlightened mind. In other words, we wish that ourselves and others gain all the qualities of the “wheel of inexhaustible ornaments” of the enlightened body, speech, and mind. Then our entire body falls to the ground, or else our five limbs make contact with it. As our right knee touches the ground, we should wish and say, in conformity with the sutra, “May all beings proceed upon the right-hand path of integrity.” As our left knee touches it, we should wish and say, “May all who are on the left-hand path of falsehood enter the true and noble path.” When our right hand touches the ground, we should wish and say, “Just as when the Buddha, seated under the bodhi tree, pressed the ground with his right hand (which was itself the product of a hundred merits), subduing all negative forces and gaining enlightenment, may all beings overcome evil and adversity, and sitting under the bodhi tree, may they also press the earth with their hands and attain the primordial wisdom of buddhahood.” When our left hand touches the ground, we should wish and say, “May I, by means of the four ways of attracting disciples, gather to myself all beings who are lost in the ordinary state of spiritual immaturity, who cling to negativity, and who are hard to benefit.” When our face and forehead touch the ground, we should wish and say, “May beings, divested of their pride, serve their teachers, gain the invisible ushnisha, and be ennobled by every virtuous quality.”
While performing the prostration in five points, we should wish and say, “May the five defilements that afflict beings be dispelled! May they bring the five powers to perfection!May beings come to recognize the five sense objects for what they are! May they gain the five kinds of preternatural knowledge completely unimpaired! May they possess the five kinds of eye in all their purity!May they be supreme among all those born in the five classes of beings! May their ethics be supreme! May their concentration be supreme! May their wisdom be supreme! May their deliverance be supreme! May their knowledge of primordial wisdom of deliverance likewise be supreme!”
Regarding the benefits of performing prostrations it has been said that “through prostration you will be born a chakravartin as many times as there are atoms [beneath your outstretched body] from the surface of the earth down to the foundation of the universe;and then finally you will attain to supreme peace.”

Taking refuge

Taking refuge opens the door to all the Buddhist teachings. It is the basis of all the vows and the source of all excellent qualities. It marks the difference between those who are inside the Dharma and those who are outside it; and through it one joins the ranks of those who are within.
Refuge is therefore of the greatest importance, for it is the entrance to the entire Dharma. In whichever kind of teaching one engages, one must first take refuge. It is the foundation of all the vows as the Trisharana-saptati says:
All may have the vows
Excepting those who have not taken refuge.
In fact, our Teacher the Buddha did not allow the vows to be given to anyone who had not taken refugefrom the eight-precept upavasa vowup to the pledges of Secret Mantra. It was only to those who had the refuge commitments that he allowed the other vows to be given.
Again, refuge is the source of all good qualities. For if someone without refuge were to undertake any of the paths, whether the path of individual liberation, the Bodhisattva path or the path of the Secret Mantra, no benefit would come of it. As Drikung Kyobpa Rinpoche has said, “If you neglect refuge, the Dharma’s foundation, there can be no benefit.” And indeed, when there is no foundation, there can be neither wall nor wall painting. On the other hand, someone who has the vows of refuge and who practices on any of these three paths will gain all the qualities of the path and its result, which are like walls and paintings built on strong and sure foundations.
As we have said, refuge marks the difference between those inside and those outside the Dharma. It is through refuge that one becomes a Buddhist. It may be observed that the line of demarcation between Buddhist and non-Buddhist lies in the affirmation or denial of the personal self. But if this were so, it would follow that the Vatsiputriya (which is a Buddhist school) would be accounted non-Buddhist. For by saying that there exists a responsible agent that cannot be said to be either permanent or impermanent, they affirm the existence of an inexpressible self.93
The term tirthika (holder of metaphysically extremist views) does not imply a complete absence of understanding. Kshitigarbha, an Indian disciple of the Lord Atisha, said that he had studied all the Buddhist and non-Buddhist texts, and yet he was still at a loss to say what differentiated them. And the glorious Atisha declared that since his teacher Shantipa had passed away and since he himself had come to Tibet, there was no one left in India capable of distinguishing the Buddhist from the non-Buddhist tenets. And he said this even though there were still the six great gatekeeper panditas (of Vikramashila) in the noble land.
As for himself, when in upper Tibet, in the region of Ngari, Atisha taught nothing but refugeas a result of which, he was nicknamed the “refuge pandita.” Moreover, when the scholars of Tibet pointed this out and asked him to teach something else, Atisha was delighted and said, “That means that even my name is working for the Buddha’s Doctrine.” As Drikung Kyobpa said, “In brief, all the sublime teachings can be condensed in refuge alone. Of all things, refuge is the most profound.” The topic of refuge will be explained in two parts: a general outline followed by an exposition of the teaching on refuge in the present text.

The general principles of refuge

The cause of refuge 

Of the four kinds of faith: vivid faith, yearning faith, confident faith, and irreversible faith, the cause of refuge is irreversible faith.

The essence of refuge

The essence of refuge is to acknowledge [the Three Jewels], committing oneself to them in order to be free of something that one holds in dread. Refuge should not be mistaken for some kind of request or prayer. To make a request is like eliciting the assistance of someone, asking for protection when something untoward occursas when a malefactor suborns an official in the hope of not being punished. By contrast, taking refuge, as described in the Sutralankara, consists of an acknowledgement and a commitment. It is a commitment to the Three Jewels and a resolution to accept them as one’s refuge. It is a clear decision that, henceforth, whatever happens good or bad, in joy or sorrow, whether one is raised up or brought low, one’s hope and trust are placed exclusively in the Three Jewels. It is crucial to understand that the essence of refuge is an acknowledgment and a commitment.

The different kinds of refuge

Although there is a way of classifying refuge according to the objects of refuge, the principal classification here has to do with the motivation with which one takes it. From this point of view, there are two kinds of refuge: worldly and world-transcending. World-transcending refuge comprises the refuge of the Hinayana and the refuge of the Mahayana. Mahayana refuge is further divided into causal refuge, which is provisional, and resultant refuge, which is ultimate.
It is said in the Dhvajagra-sutra:
People when alarmed by fears
Turn mostly to the hills or woods
And have recourse to trees or sacred groves,
In holy places taking sanctuary.
All these are not the best of refuges
And all who thus rely on them
Will not be freed from suffering.
As it is said, when alarmed by minor and imminent adversities, such as illness or evil forces, people take refuge in the gods of the mountains or the forest, in Ishvara, Brahma, and Vishnu, as well as in the eight classes of spirits. But how can such entities protect them from all their sufferings? It is not even certain that they can keep them from temporary dangers. They are not the supreme refuge. On the other hand, even refuge in the Three Jewels, if taken with an ordinary, worldly motive, is no more than a worldly refuge.
Concerning world-transcending refuge, the refuge of the Hinayana is the Three Jewels defined as follows. “The Buddha, the greatest of humankind” is the Victorious Shakyamuni, the supreme nirmanakayathe Buddha, whose mind is the dharmakaya and whose body is the rupakaya. “The sublime Dharma, the highest peace and absence of all desire and attachment” is the elimination of all afflictive emotions and their seeds. The Dharma is thus nirvana or cessation. “The Sangha, the supreme gathering” refers to the realization that is “gathered” in the mind of a person (from which it had been previously absent). Now no one, whether human or divine is able to separate the truth of the path from the person who realizes it. It is for this reason that the supreme gathering is the Sangha (for “sangha” means gathering). Other gatherings are not supreme, for it is said, among other things, that “all that is born will die at last; whatever comes together will finally disperse.” The Hinayana Sangha moreover consists of four groups of beings: the stream-enterers, the once-returners and the nonreturners, all of whom are on the path of learning; and the Arhats, who are on the path of no-more-learning.
When, in the context of the Hinayana, one takes refuge in the Three Jewels as just described, one is motivated by fear of the perils of samsara. The skandhas seem as terrible as an executioner armed with a knife, and the dhatus are like poisonous serpents. Wishing to be liberated from them, one takes refuge for as long as one lives, on the relative level, and until the result of the path is gained, on the ultimate level.
When, in the Mahayana, one goes for refuge, one cultivates an unbearably powerful compassion for beings, who have been one’s mothers in the past and whose number is as boundless as the sky is vast. But it is not enough to feel compassion for them; one must be determined and decide to liberate them from their suffering. As long as one is not free oneself, however, one is powerless to bring others to freedom. Consequently, in order to free oneself and others from the perils of both samsaric existence and the peace of nirvana, one takes refuge in the Three Jewels, according to the Mahayana, until one gains enlightenment. This refuge consists of causal refuge, which is provisional, and also of resultant refuge, which is ultimate.

An explanation of provisional causal refuge

In order to liberate oneself and others from the perils of existence and peace, one takes refuge in the Three Jewels [considered to be] outside oneself. How is this done? According to the general explanation, one takes refuge in the Three Jewels defined in the following manner. The Jewel of Buddha is the enlightened being who possesses the three or four kayas and is something distinct from one’s own mind, such as the Teacher Shakyamuni. He first cultivated bodhichitta and accumulated merit for three countless kalpas. Eventually, he took birth as the son of King Shuddhodana, and at length attained enlightenment beneath the bodhi tree. The Jewel of Dharma is the sublime Doctrine of transmission and realization, which dwells in the minds of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. Finally, the Jewel of Sangha is an assembly that is different and separate from oneself, namely, the Bodhisattvas who have attained the ground of realization from which there is no regression, such as the venerable Manjushri, Maitreya, and so on.

An explanation of ultimate resultant refuge

As the Protector Maitreya said (in the Sutralankara), “It should be understood that resultant refuge is the resolution whereby one pledges oneself, out of love and compassion, to buddhahood.” It is the pledge to accomplish within one’s own mind the ultimate Three Jewels as a means to avoiding for oneself and others the shortcomings of both existence and peace. When one finally accomplishes the Three Jewels within one’s own mind, one is delivered from all the fears and dangers of samsara and nirvana. Therefore resultant refuge is also ultimate refuge. As it is said in the Mahayana scripture, the Uttaratantra-shastra:
Ultimately, only buddhahood is the refuge
Of all wandering beings.
For Buddha has the Dharma-body;
And ultimately he too is the Sangha.
It should be understood that generally speaking, the subject of the entire Uttaratantra-shastra is none other than refuge. For it is said that the four chapters dealing with the Buddha-nature, buddhahood, the qualities of buddhahood, and the activities of buddhahood constitute an exposition of the resultant refuge.Causal refuge is not ultimate precisely because it is unable to protect one from all the fears and dangers of existence and peace.
All this implies that resultant refuge and bodhichitta in intention are one and the same. One might therefore wonder whether there is any difference between them. The master Vasubandhu had four disciples by whom he was himself excelled. In his great commentary on the Sutralankara, Sthiramati, who was superior to Vasubandhu in his knowledge of Abhidharma, affirmed that resultant refuge and bodhichitta in intention come to the same thing. For he said, “The cultivation of bodhichitta is also called taking refuge.” On the other hand, Atisha asserted a difference between them according to the presence or absence of the two hooks, or aims, of the commitment.Finally, the omniscient Longchenpa said that the distinction between refuge and bodhichitta corresponds to the difference between aiming for the benefit of oneself and aiming for the benefit of others. It has been taught that if this view is examined, it may be reduced to the assertion that they are identical in their nature but different in their conceptual aspect. Insofar as there is the resolution to act “for the sake of all beings,” it is bodhichitta; but insofar as one is resolved “to attain perfect enlightenment,” it is (resultant) refuge. It is in this way that the two may be distinguished.

Refuge according to the Bodhicharyavatara

Although there are numerous ways of considering the taking of refuge, whether at the Hinayana or Mahayana levels, in the present text it is discussed in three stages. There is an explanation of the Hinayana and Mahayana refuge, followed by a general explanation of how refuge is taken.

An explanation of Hinayana refuge

It is said in the texts of the Vinaya that one takes refuge for as long as one lives in order to free oneself from the sorrows of samsaric existence and to attain the peace of nirvana. With regard to the object of refuge, it is said in the Abhidharmakosha:
Those who go for refuge in the Three,
Take refuge in the Dharma of no-further-learning
And also in the Dharma of both learning and no-further-learning
And this respectively brings forth the Buddha and the Sangha.
They take refuge in nirvana.
As it is said (at the Hinayana level), the physical body of the Buddha was the residue of the truth of suffering. In being the son of King Shuddhodana, the Buddha was an ordinary man called Prince Siddhartha. He traversed the five paths “on a single seat” [beneath the bodhi tree] and attained perfect buddhahood. Because his body was that of an ordinary person, propelled by the former karma of Prince Siddhartha, it was not, for that very reason, an object of refuge. This is the belief of the Vaibhashikas. Consequently, the Buddha as an object of refuge is none other than the truth of the path of no-more-learning as realized by his fully enlightened mind. The Sangha as object of refuge consists of the realization of the paths of learning and no-more-learning present in the minds of the Sangha. For the bodies of the members of the Sangha are likewise the residues of the truth of suffering. The Dharma as object of refuge is the absence of defilement (which is now overcome) from the mind of the Buddha and from the minds of the Sanghain other words, the state of nirvana, beyond suffering, the absence of desire and attachment which constitutes the truth of cessation. The Three Jewels are defined in this way as the objects of refuge at the Hinayana level.

An explanation of Mahayana refuge

[verse 26] Shantideva says that we take refuge in the Buddhas who possess the four kayas and the five wisdoms. We take refuge with the wish that all beings, innumerable as the sky is vast, attain perfect buddhahood, and we do so until we have gained ultimate enlightenment ourselves. In the same way, we take refuge in the sublime Dharma of transmission and realization, as well as in the noble Sangha of the Bodhisattvas. Regarding the length of time during which we take refuge, we do so until, beneath a bodhi tree (on the level of outer appearances), we too attain perfect enlightenment for the sake of beings, and until, inwardly, our awareness, the sugatagarbha, becomes manifest in its natural state. It is said that all the Victorious Ones of the past, present, and future attain enlightenment beneath a bodhi tree (the bodhi tree at Vajrasana in India, in the case of the Buddhas of this Fortunate Kalpa, or the tree called the Precious Illuminating Lotus, in the case of Amitabha and so forth). As it is said in the Bhadracharya-pranidhana:
Promptly do they go beneath the bodhi tree
And sit there for the benefit of beings.
Attaining buddhahood, they excellently turn the wheel of Dharma.
The sugatagarbha in its true condition is perceived by the Buddhas alone. Not even the great Bodhisattvas can see it as the Buddhas do. The Lord Maitreya has said (in the Uttaratantra-shastra):
Even noble beings see it like the sun is seen
By newborn infants in their mother’s bower.
The object of refuge comprises the Three extraordinary Jewels of the Great Vehicle. Buddha is, as the Uttaratantra-shastra says:
Uncompounded and spontaneous,
Realized not through an external cause,
Possessed of wisdom, love, capacity:
Such is Buddha who has gained this twofold goal.
Buddhahood is not compounded through causes and conditions, and its qualities are spontaneously accomplished. Neither is it realized through extrinsic circumstances; it is directly realized through self-cognizing awareness. Such are the three perfect qualities that apply to a Buddha’s own benefit. Moreover, since Buddhas perceive phenomena both in their nature and in their multiplicity, they have a knowledge of everything that is knowable. With a great compassion that loves unconditionally and beyond reference, they teach the path and have the power to dispel all suffering and afflictive emotion. These are their three perfect qualities that have a bearing on the welfare of others. The perfected benefits of oneself and others are counted as two distinct bases for the classification of these two sets of threefold qualities. The Buddha is therefore endowed with eight qualitiesand the three or four kayas.
With respect to the Dharma, the Uttaratantra-shastra says:
It is inconceivable, free from two, and free from thought,
Pure and lucent, with the nature of an antidote,
Free from all attachment and from all attachment freeing:
Thus the Dharma is defined as twofold truth.
As the text says, the Dharma is beyond all conception. It is the pacification of karma and defilements as well as of discursive thought. These three ultimate qualities refer to the truth of cessation, defined as freedom from craving and desire. The Dharma is pure of stain; it is endowed with the light of wisdom and is a counteractive force against all defilements. These three ultimate qualities refer to the truth of the path, which delivers us from craving and desire. This is the Dharma of realization, which is defined in terms of two [of the four noble] truths and endowed with eight qualities.
If this point is examined with care, it will be found that because the truth of cessation consists in elimination or absence (of impurity), it does not constitute a realization (in a positive sense). Why then do we call it the Dharma of realization? Cessation is the result of the truth of the path; the former occurs when the latter is realized. In other words, it is through the truth of the path that the ultimate expanse free from craving is reached. And this ultimate expanse or emptiness, indivisible as it is from primordial wisdom, is called cessation. It is therefore included in the Dharma of realizationand this is a very important point. Finally, the Dharma of transmission of the Mahayana scriptures is the favorable condition for the Dharma of realization, and this is defined in terms of two [of the four] truths.
The Sangha consists of the noble Bodhisattvas residing on the Mahayana grounds of realization whence there is no regression. Maitreya has said (again in the Uttaratantra-shastra):
Their knowledge of the nature and the multiplicity of things,
And their inward primal wisdom is unstained.
And so the Sangha of the wise who never will regress
Has qualities that cannot be surpassed.
As the text says, these Bodhisattvas possess the three qualities of primordial wisdom. Because they have a direct realization of ultimate reality, the sugatagarbha, they have the primordial wisdom that knows the nature of all things. And because they see that the sugatagarbha is present in all beings, they have the primordial wisdom that knows all that there is. These two wisdoms, which are inseparable, constitute awareness-wisdom. These three kinds of primordial wisdom constitute the qualities of the knowledge of the Bodhisattvas.
This primordial wisdom is free from the emotional and the cognitive veils, and also from the veil of meditative absorption. Being free from afflictive emotion, it is free from the obscurations arising from craving. Being free from the cognitive veils, it is free from the obscurations that are an impediment to knowledge. And being free from selfish aims, it is free from the obscurations of an inferior attitude. Thus the Bodhisattvas possess three qualities of freedom. All together, this comes to six qualities [three kinds of primordial wisdom and three freedoms], which, with the addition of the twin bases for the categories of knowledge and freedom, means that the Mahayana Sangha possesses eight qualities.

The general way of taking refuge

In accordance with the formula “The Buddha is the teacher unsurpassed; the sacred Dharma is the guardian unsurpassed, the Sangha is the leader unsurpassed,” the actual protector or refuge for beginners is in fact the Dharma. The Buddha said, “I have taught you the methods that lead to liberation. Practice with diligence; your liberation depends on you.” He also said:
The Sage does not wash sins away with water,
Nor wipe away the pain of beings with his hands.
His realization he does not transfer to others,
He frees by showing them the peace of ultimate reality.

This means that deliverance from the sufferings of samsara and the lower realms comes from accomplishing the sublime Dharma. Those who observe the eight-precept upavasa vow even for a single day protect their minds throughout that day from all faults and downfalls; and in a future life they will be born in a celestial realm. Therefore, the true refuge for beginners is the sacred Dharma. The other two Jewels are in themselves unable to give them such protection, and this is why the sacred Dharma is described as the unsurpassable refuge or protection.
In the Nyingma tradition of the Secret Mantra, on the other hand, it is said that the object of refuge is bliss, clarity, and absence of thought, or the channels, wind-energies, and essence-drops, or again the ultimate nature, its natural expression, and “compassion” [that is, its creative power] and so forth. [Refuge is thus] the wish and commitment to purify the channels, wind-energies, and essence-drops of the body. Through such a practice, the result is accomplished as set forth in the texts (for example, the nirmanakaya, that is, the purified channels).
Moreover, through being unaware of the difference between taking refuge and making prayers, one might pray the channels, wind-energies, and essence-drops, abiding in one’s body, to afford some kind of protection for oneself and so on. But these are not things in which to place one’s hopes. In brief, the difference between making a prayer and taking refuge lies precisely in the fact that the true object of refuge for beginners is the Dharma itselfthe practice of the Dharma within one’s mind. It is crucial to grasp this essential point. To fail to understand that the essence of refuge is a mental pledge, and that, of the supreme Three Jewels, it is the sublime Dharma that is the true refuge for beginners; to fail to understand that refuge means a commitment to implement the teachings leads to a repudiation of the Mantrayana refuge of the Nyingma tradition as mentioned above. This is the result of not knowing the difference between taking refuge and making prayers. Certain people in the Nyingma school, unable to deal with criticisms regarding this question, lose their tempers and start to have doubts regarding their own teachings, and end up by rejecting them. This sort of thing happens simply through a failure to understand the important points mentioned above.
Given that the true refuge is the Dharma, what is the point, one might ask, of describing the Buddha and Sangha also as objects of refuge? But the fact is that, if there had been no Buddha, we would still be in ignorance and would have no inkling of what we call the Dharma. Because he perfectly revealed to beings the faultless path that he himself had traversed, the Buddha is also an object of refuge. As for the Sangha, the truth is that we, the inhabitants of a decadent age, have not been fortunate enough to meet the Buddha in person. Nevertheless, the Sangha guides us on the authentic path of liberation. Therefore the Sangha too is our object of refuge. Consequently, we must take refuge in the Three Jewels, our Teacher, our Path, and our Companions. Since our teacher is the Buddha, we promise that we will only act and practice according to his instructions. We will pay no heed to the expositions of non-Buddhist teachersor for that matter to the words even of those close to us, parents and relatives, should they be opposed to the Dharma. Since our path is the sublime Dharma, we pledge ourselves to the practice of it, according to the instructions of the Victorious One; and we will refrain from implicating ourselves in negative worldly pursuits, such as commerce, farming, the defeat of our enemies, and the biased protection of our friends.
Taking refuge in the Sangha (that is, the assembly of noble Bodhisattvas) and regarding them as our companions may be described in the following terms. If we go to Lhasa, our companions will be those who follow the lead of the caravan-chief. They will not be those who stay behind and do not make the journey, or who do not go the whole distance (though they may be traveling in the same direction). In the same way, we do not associate, whether in thought, word, or deed, with those (be they lay people or ordained clergy) who are swept away by evil, mundane activities associated with the eight worldly concerns. Similarly, we do not keep company with the Shravakas or Pratyekabuddhas. It is essential to train ourselves and follow in the footsteps of the noble Bodhisattvas, the children of the Buddha. For it is they who are our true companions. We should come to a firm decision and resolve to keep aloof from those who will lead us away from the path of Dharma. We can see therefore that to take refuge in the Three Jewels as our Teacher, Path, and Companions is a point of vital importance.

Refuge precepts

It is not enough simply to know about refuge; we must actually take the refuge commitments properly in the presence of a teacher. And once taken, the commitments must be kept. The refuge precepts are of two kinds: common and particular, the latter having to do with actions to be avoided, actions to be implemented, and additional precepts.
The precepts concerning actions to be avoided are as follows. Once we have taken refuge in the Buddha, we should no longer take permanent refuge in the worldly gods (who are themselves caught in the circle of existence), nor should we pay homage to them. Once we have taken refuge in the Dharma, we should do no harm to any living being (even in our dreams) but protect them as much as we can. Once we have taken refuge in the Sangha, we should no longer associate with those who hold extreme views, nor with those who criticize our teacher and the teachings, and have no faith in them.
With regard to the precepts to be implemented, it is written in the Pundarika-sutra:
Appearing in a host of different forms,
The Buddha urges virtue on all wandering beings.
Accordingly, we should consider all likenesses of the Buddha, even a fragment of a clay image or tsa-tsa, as representations of the enlightened mind, as the Jewel of Buddha; and we should rid ourselves of any kind of disrespect. Instead, we should devotedly make offerings before them, lift them to our heads, and keep them in a clean place.
Once we have taken refuge in the Dharma, we should consider even a single syllable of the teaching as the Jewel of Dharma and avoid any kind of disrespect; we should never put texts on the ground and never walk over them. When turning the pages of the books, we should never lick our fingers and make stains on the text. Instead, books should be treated with reverence. As it is said in the Ear-tip Jewel Scripture:
In the final cycle of five hundred years,
I shall remain in form of written letters.
Consider them as me and reverence them.
And in the Ganti-sutra, it is said that the Great Mother will take the form of the wooden ganti.97
Regarding the Sangha, we should consider any symbol of the monastic orderbe it no more than the yellow belt of a renunciant, or only a patch or yellow or red clothas the Jewel of Sangha and we should treat such objects with respect. It is said in the Ganti-sutra:
In future ages, at the sunset of the Sage’s teaching,
Any scraps of red or yellow cloth
The gods themselves will take and keep them as supports of faith,
And on the summit of Mount Meru they will worship them.
The additional or supplementary precepts are as follows. We should think of all our teachers and spiritual friends, all who reveal what is to be done and what is to be avoided, as the very Jewel of Buddha. And we should strive to please and honor them. Their instructions should be regarded as the Jewel of Dharma, earnestly accepted in their entirety without the slightest trace of disobedience. We should consider all our teacher’s attendants and students as the very Jewel of Sangha, and we should keep them company, respecting them in thought, word, and deed, without irritating them even for an instant. It is written in the Mahabheri-sutra:
Ananda do not sorrow!
Ananda do not weep!
In future I will come again, appearing as your spiritual friend
To act for your and others’ sake.
The common precepts of refuge are described by Ngari Pandita Pema Wangyal:
For bribes, or even to preserve your life, do not give up the rare and precious Jewels,
And in the greatest need do not rely on any other means.
Do not omit your offerings at the proper times.
Take refuge and lead others to the same.
Wherever you may go, pay homage to the Buddhas
Who preside in that direction.
These five are common precepts taught by Lord Atisha.
As explained, all this is what we should correctly implement or avoid. Taking refuge in the Three Jewels has the following benefits. It plants the seed of liberation; it places one within the Buddhist community; it protects from fear and from danger and brings about the attainment of buddhahood. Indeed, the benefits of refuge are unbounded. It is said in the Suryagarbha-sutra:
Even myriad demons cannot slay
The ones who go for refuge in the Buddha.
Their discipline may fail, their minds may be disturbed,
But it is sure that birth they will transcend.
Finally, the Vimaladattaparipriccha-sutra says:
If all the merit that accrues from refuge
Were to take material form,
The whole of space would be replete with it
And even then there would be more besides.

The confession of negative actions

The visualization of the witnesses of one’s confession

[verse 27] In the sky in front of himself, Shantideva visualizes the object of confession: all the perfect Buddhas, victorious, virtuous and transcendent, together with all the great Bodhisattvas, who reside in the infinite buddhafields in the ten directions and who are the sovereigns of great compassion. He prays to them with his palms pressed together.

The confession itself

Confession has four aspects or rather four strengths: the strength of regretting that one has done wrong, the strength of the support, the strength of the remedial practice, and the strength of amendment.

The strength of regretting that one has done wrong

[verse 28] What is it that Shantideva says? In this and all his other (that is, former) lives, while wandering in beginningless samsara, ignorant of what actions were to be adopted and what were to be rejected, disturbed by afflictive emotion, Shantideva admits that he perpetrated three kinds of evil deed: he performed actions that were evil by their nature; he transgressed the rules of discipline; and he incited others to do the same.
[verse 29] Deceived and overwhelmed by ignorance of the karmic law of cause and effect, and of the choice to be made between things to be done and things not to be done, Shantideva admits that he rejoiced in the evil committed by others. But now, seeing and acknowledging that these three kinds of erroneous conduct, whether serious or trivial, were indeed wrong, he openly confesses themnot just verbally, but sincerely from his heartin the presence of the great protectors, the Buddhas and their Bodhisattva offspring, promising to refrain from them in the future.
[verse 30] In particular, Shantideva confesses the most serious faults he has committed with reference to the “field of excellence” (the Three Jewels of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha) and to the “field of benefit” (his father, mother, and all who are rich in good qualities and are worthy of praise, such as learned spiritual masters and indeed all teachers). He confesses all the faults he has committed out of attachment, aversion, and ignorance: physically, by killing, destroying, and beating; verbally, by criticism, slander, and evil speech; and mentally, through wrong views, malevolence, and so on.
Of all such evil actions, attacks upon the Three Jewels or the spoliation of religious property (the stealing, robbing, or appropriating of it to oneself) are the most seriousreligious property being all that has been associated with the Buddha, Dharma, and the teachers of the Dharma. The unvanquished Maitreya has said in the Uttaratantra-shastra, “How can freedom come to one who hates the Dharma?” There is also the story of the great adept Kyergangpa, who was tormented by the powerful sensation of his body being pierced by the white letter “A”the fully ripened result, he said, of keeping the money a benefactor had given him to recite the Ashtasahasrika (the Prajnaparamita-sutra in eight thousand stanzas). It is said that stealing the property of the sangha, wherever it may be, and especially the provisions directly donated to it constitutes a very grave fault. In short, it is said in the sutras that to steal or traffic the property, great or small, of the sangha, or to appropriate it by dishonest means, cannot be purified even by confession and will surely lead to rebirth in the hell realms:
The sangha’s property is like diamonds;
The sangha’s property is like poison.
But though for poison there’s an antidote,
To stealing of the sangha’s goods there is no remedy.
There is a story about certain people who, after using the earthen vessels of the sangha, were reborn in the ephemeral hell of a cooking pot. Moreover, the Buddha, who knew all things, said that it is improper to give to the lower temple what is intended for the higher, or vice versa, or to keep the summer food of the sangha for the winter, or the reverse, or again to keep for tomorrow what is offered for today.
We can give some slight illustration of this by citing stories from the past. It is said in the Vinaya that if one fouls the wall and pillars of the monastic assembly hall with spittle or nasal discharge, one will be reborn in the ephemeral hell of a wall or pillar. If one uses for oneself a broom or a mortar belonging to the sangha, one will be reborn in the ephemeral hell of a broom or mortar. Again, if the monks hoard the summer food till winter, or the winter food till summer without distributing it, they will suffer greatly by being reborn as insects that have waists so tiny as to be like threads that are almost severed. In the Damamako-sutra, there is a story about a large tree that was entirely covered by worms that were devouring it. It was covered so that not even a pinpoint of its surface was exposed. The tree lamented for it was suffering intensely. It is said that this was the fully ripened effect of the actions of a monastic servant called Lita who embezzled the belongings of the monks and gave it as provisions to the laity. Lita was reborn in the tree and the lay people took the form of the worms. And after this, rebirth in hell awaited him.
Then there is the story about a filthy pond in the town of Rajagriha where for many years a four-legged, lizard-like insect lived in great suffering. When the Buddha came there with his disciples, he explained to them its karma. Formerly, he said, during the dispensation of the Buddha Vipashyin, in order to accumulate merit, five hundred merchants had offered some precious gems to the fourteen thousand monks abiding in the nearby monastery. The monks had accepted the offering, which they entrusted to the monastery bursar. Later, when the alms offerings had failed, the monks asked the bursar if he had sold the jewels. The bursar flew into a rage. He told them to eat their own excrement and said that the jewels had been given to him alone and not to the monastic community. Owing to this state of affairs, the monastic community had no option but to disband, each one going off by himself.
As a result of such a deed, the monastic bursar fell directly into the great hell, and for ninety-one kalpas was engulfed in vomit. Freed at length from that state, he was reborn in the evil-smelling cesspool from which he still could not escape, though he had been living there for many a long year. Already in the past, the Buddha commented, the Buddha Ratnashikhin had visited that place with his disciples and had explained to them the karma of this selfsame individual; and he was followed later by the Buddha Vishvabhukra, who did the same. And later, when the lizard-like insect eventually expired, it was reborn again in hell for an interminable lapse of time, after which, it appeared once again in the same unclean pond. Afterward there came the Buddhas Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and Kashyapa, all of whom explained the karma of the same creature. And likewise in the future, the Buddha said, all the thousand Buddhas [of the Fortunate Kalpa] will pass by here with their disciples and will explain this being’s karmic destiny. In response to this explanation, the monks were so frightened that the hair on their bodies stood on end, and they strove diligently to tame their thoughts, words, and deeds. This story is also recounted in the Damamako-sutra.
Again, to the north of Nalanda, there lay the village of Katvam in the vicinity of which there was a subterranean cave. Once when a crowd of very young monks were playing there, a preta appeared in the form of a strange whirlwind all sparkling with firelight. The children threw stones at it and ran away, but one of the children who had thrown stones was possessed. His feet turned backward and his skin began to peel away, flames issued from his mouth and he began to yell at everyone in Sanskrit.
Now there lived a yogi nearby whose practice was to meditate on loving-kindness. He heard of what was going on, and, astonished to hear that the child was speaking Sanskrit, he went to listen. He questioned the preta and asked why the boy was burning. He was burning, the answer came, because he had welcomed the preta with hatred. By contrast, the yogi was not burning precisely because he had greeted the preta with love. The yogi then asked what action had caused the preta to be born in such a form. The latter replied that, since the yogi was a noble practitioner of loving-kindness, he would tell him, provided the monks were dismissed and sent away.
When the monks had gone, the preta described how he had once been Jinakara, abbot of Nalanda and, acting as though the place belonged to him, had once eaten unlawfully half a measure of old rice that belonged to the monks. On account of such an action, he had been reborn as a preta with a burning belly. The fire that incessantly consumed his entire vitals issued from his mouth in tongues of flame. In addition, because he had failed to remove his shoes on entering the temple that contained the Tripitaka, his feet were now bent backward. And since he had anointed his own body with the butter offered for light offerings to the Buddha image in the temple and had never repaid his debt, he was now obliged to suffer, his skin constantly peeling away. Religious property, the preta observed, is a perilous thing; and of all the Three Jewels, it is the property of the sangha that is most dangerous.
The yogi went on to inquire when the preta would be released from such an existence. The latter replied that this could only occur in approximately fifteen thousand years time, after which he would be obliged to go to the Hell of Unrelenting Pain. When asked whether there was a method for confessing his misdemeanor, the preta replied that since he had despised the karmic principle of cause and effect, there was no remedy. On the other hand, the preta said, a great benefit comes from refraining from using the property of the sangha. Indeed, his own attendant Gunashri had loved the monastic order more than his own life and had held its property in dread as though it were poison. When he came to die, he was welcomed by enlightened beings and dharma-protectors, with rainbow lights and music, and now he is liberated from samsara. Asked why it had been necessary to send the young monks away, the preta replied that they had all been his students in the past and that if they had heard the story, they would have been saddened and he would have been ashamed.
At that, the possessed child fainted. After a moment, when he was able to speak again, the yogi asked him what had happened and where the preta had been. The latter replied that he had been off to create difficulties for the virtuous practice of another yogi living further up the valley. When asked why he was behaving so badlyhe who had been an abbot learned in the Tripitakathe preta replied that though this had been so, he was unable to control his mind. He again possessed the child in such a way that its entire body became hot. Tongues of flame issued from the mouth and nose of the child, who began yelling at everyone. The yogi from higher up the valley was called and he visualized himself in a wrathful form. But the preta said that he himself had gained stability in the generation stage of wrathful deities and had no fear of anyone with worldly powers.
When the yogi who had been meditating on love asked the preta why it was that he went to the other yogi, the preta replied that though, when eating (be it never so much as the tiniest grain of barley), he felt that it was adding fuel to the fire in his belly, it was nevertheless because of his former habits that he went to the yogi up the valley in order to still his hunger, and that the trouble caused to the yogi was a means of removing his bad karma. When he was questioned further, the preta replied that at the time when he had been an abbot, the yogi from higher up the valley had come to Nalanda to study grammar. But he had neglected the rules of discipline while all the time taking advantage of his monastic state. He had availed himself of the monastic provisions of water and wood, and this was the reason for his now having to suffer such adversities.
When asked whether the yogi’s bad karma would be exhausted through such trials, the preta answered that he had only begun to experience the results of this action and that in his next life, he would have to be born as a preta. When asked whether there was a means of purifying his negativity, the preta said that if the yogi were to pay homage to the sangha and make an open confession in their presence, his negative karma would be purified.
For a brief moment, the yogi cultivated loving-kindness toward the preta, who, pressing his palms together, said, “Are you not my mother come back to me?” And weeping, he vanished, never to return. Now, as the preta was recounting his story, most of the bystanders, who had formerly been his students began to weep. It is in light of such tales that one should understand the meaning of the Buddha’s advice that the property of the sangha should be thought of as an ulcerated sore.98
Yet again it is recounted in a sutra how once upon a time, five hundred people polluted the water set aside for use in a monastic kitchen, with the result that it could not be used for cooking the monks’ rice. Thus the Dharma teaching of the sangha was interrupted for that day. The karmic result of this act was that the five hundred people had to suffer by being reborn as five hundred loathsome pretas.
Again, it has been said that, once when the Lord Atisha was residing at Nalanda, there was a devout bursar. It was his duty, one day, to provide the monks with drinking water. He thought to himself, however, that if he were to distribute water on that occasion, there would be plenty to drink on that day, but not enough for the morrow. Believing that such a thing would be untoward, he decided to keep the water till the next day. Now during the night, he himself felt very thirsty and went to drink from a large copper tank, only to find that it was dry with not a drop of water remaining. Now the tank had just been filled, so the monk thought that he must be having visions since the water could not have evaporated so soon. He therefore decided to investigate the matter and put a stone in the tank. He then went to drink from a large pool at the gate of the monastery. He found however that this too was dry. Once again he thought that this must surely be an illusion since it was impossible for the water in the pool to have dried up as well. Therefore, in order to investigate further, he placed a large stone in the center of where the pool used to be. He then went to drink from the river, but found that the river also had run dry. Wishing to investigate further what must surely be a hallucination, the bursar wrapped his robes around the trunk of a tree on the far bank of the river. Then, still thirsty, he retired to bed. The following morning when he went to look, he found that the stone was still in the copper tank, which was now filled with water. There too was the stone marker in the pool in a place that was now inaccessible because of the depth of water. And then he saw his robes tied around the tree, now on the far bank of the river. It was said that the immediate ripening of his action implied that the fault was small.
Therefore, all those who are closely related with lamas and monks, and particularly those who hold positions of responsibility, high or low, such as ecclesiastical and monastic treasurers, bursars, and managersall who are exposed to such temptationsshould be scrupulous in their handling of the property of the Three Jewels and especially that of the sangha. For if they are careless, they will certainly have to suffer the unbearable pain of being burned and boiled in hell for many kalpas. It is therefore my request that they take kindly to these words (which are proffered in the hope that they might be of some benefit), and act with care and circumspection.
[verse 31] In the presence of his teachers, the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, Shantideva goes on to confess openly and one by one all the evil deeds that he, the old sinner that he is, has committed in thought, word, and deed, and which cling to his mind as rust sticks to ironunbearably grievous faults, the karmic fruit of which is to be reborn in hell. Why is it necessary to confess our faults swiftly? It is because we have no idea of when we shall die. The circumstances of death are uncertain and there is no surety that we will not die today. And the suffering experienced at the moment of death when life is severed, the suffering that occurs after death in the bardo, and the sufferings of the lower realms in the existence to follow, are all the results of negative action. [verse 32] This being so, Shantideva says, it may be that he will die before completing his confession, without feeling remorse for evils committed in the past, without making a resolution to abstain from such actions in the future, and without striving in positive actions, the antidote to evil. If this were to occur, he would be obliged to experience the pains of the lower realms, and what means would there be for his mind ever to be freed from them? Therefore, Shantideva prays that the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas swiftly grant him their protection.
We might well think that, although we have to die some day, it does not matter if there is no time today for the confession of our sinswe won’t die without confession. [verse 33] But Yama, the demonic Lord of Death, is not to be trusted. He will not wait for us to finish what we have started (our confession, for instance), and he will not wait for us to do what we have planned but have not yet begun. And whereas it may be said that hundreds of healthy people may die within the lifetime of someone already suffering from a terminal illness, the fact is that whether we are healthy or ill, there is no certainty that we will not suddenly drop dead, like the sun breaking through the clouds or a lamp suddenly extinguished in the wind. Life is uncertain and the confident trust that we shall not die today is quite misplaced. Since there is no saying when, where, and how death may occur, it is impossible to be certain that we will not die today. As Nagarjuna has said (in the Suhrillekha):
Life flickers in the flurries of a thousand ills,
More fragile than the bubbles on a stream.
In sleep, each breath departs and is again drawn in;
How wondrous that we wake up living still!
[verse 34] When death arrives, we must leave everything behind: our home, our country, relatives and companions, our community, enemies and friends, family and possessions, clothes and sustenance, even our own bodies. We go forth into the next life completely alone. Shantideva confesses, however, that, forgetful of this; and in order to protect his family and those who are close to him (acquaintances, friends, and the people he likes), and in order to get the better of his enemies, he has committed many evils through attachment and aversion, killing, stealing, and so on. And it has all been so pointless. [verse 35] For even if he has failed to overcome them, his enemies will die in any case and cease to exist. Even if he is successful in guarding and caring for his friends and loved ones, nothing is achieved; they too will vanish in death. And he himself will die and cease to be. The entire universe, with its continents and mountains, with all the beings that it contains, friendly, hostile, or indifferentbe they as high-ranking as the heavens, as strong as thunder, as rich as the nagas, as beautiful as the gods, as fascinating as rainbowsall is destined to destruction. Whatever strongholds have been built, whatever wealth has been accumulated, whatever families have come togethereverything will go. How absurd to do evil for their sake!
[verse 36] Shantideva gives the example of the objects of the five sense consciousnesses that he enjoyed the previous night in his dreams, together with whatever was done in their regard: enemies he defeated, friends he protected, the wealth, honors, and all the rest that he gained. He wakes in the morning to find he has nothing to show for it; everything is no more than a memory. In just the same way, he says, everything done the day before, all distinctions and discriminations made concerning the five objects of senseaccepting some, rejecting others, subduing rivals, supporting friends; everything done in the name of business, lands, wealth, honor, renown, food, and clothes; everything that was wanted and experiencedall is now no more than a memory: “This I did and this was done to me.” Everything that has passed and no longer exists will never be seen again; it can bring no active benefit or harm. It is pointless to engage in action because of it.
[verse 37] Leaving aside the friends and enemies of our past lives, even in the course of the present existence, so many people whom we have liked or disliked have passed away. In so doing, they also are now no more than memories, unable to help or harm us in the slightest way. This being so, it might be tempting to think that the same applies to the evil actions perpetrated for their sake: They too are gone and can do no harm. This, however, is a mistake. The fully ripened, unbearable effects of all the evil deeds that we have perpetrated through attachment or hatred, on account of friend or foe, have still to be experienced. Our karma is like our shadow; it never goes away but lies before us as though in wait. It is written in the Rajavavadaka-sutra:
When the dangerous moment comes, O king, and you must go,
You’ll not be followed by your court, your wealth, your friends.
And yet wherever beings take their birth,
Their karma dogs them like their shadow.
All that lies before us are the effects of positive and negative action. It is as when the Buddha took Nanda to the Heaven of the Thirty-three where he saw his future birthplace in the beautiful celestial pavilions, and then to the hell realms where he saw the copper cauldron that was prepared for him. Similarly, when the householder Shuka measured out the park that he was to offer to the Buddha, Shariputra declared that the results of such an act would be experienced in that very same life.
It is just as when important lamas or dignitaries travel, their monks and attendants go on before them to prepare the place and the kitchen so that they can welcome them. It is said that in exactly the same way, due to their specific karmic perceptions, evildoers will behold the henchmen of Yama welcoming them and leading them to hell, while those who have practiced virtue will be greeted by celestial beings and by their gurus, and will be led to the pure realms.
[verse 38] Summing up the situation, Shantideva says that the thought never came to his mind that he himself was only a brief and transient phenomenonlike a traveler passing through or an insect that lives for only a season. He does not know where he has come from; he has no idea where he will go. And the time will soon arrive when he will cease to be. Without knowledge or understanding, he says, he has clung to the notion that things are permanent; he was confused about what was to be done and what was not to be done. Through attachment to the things he wanted and to the people he perceived as close to him, and through aversion for what he disliked and whatever he perceived as alien, he killed, robbed, and all the rest. All these many negativities, he says, must now be confessed at once and without delay.
[verse 39] For the fact is that his span of life is not increasing; it diminishes constantly like a pond without an inlet. Never halting night and day, the moments that compose his life are slipping by. Not a single instant can remain. His span of life is constantly decreasing. As the saying goes, when the karma that propels the present life is spent, there is no way to prolong it even if the king of physicians were to appear in person. No external force, he says, can increase his span of life. For himself and everyone else, what is there to look forward to but death? All this points to the importance of confessing one’s misdeeds. It is said in the Anityartha-parikatha:
A pool whose inlet has been stopped
Can only dwindle and can never swell.
Just so for all who enter on the path that leads to death,
How can they now rely upon this fleeting life?
[verse 40] SoShantideva pictures to himselfwhen his span of life has come to term and death arrives, there he will be prostrate upon his last bed surrounded by those close to him, parents and siblings, doctors, friends and those he loves, all of whom will suffer as though they themselves were dying instead of him. They will do all they can to protect him, but all will be in vain. For, Shantideva says, no one can take from him the unbearable anguish that comes from the severance of life’s thread. He alone will be the one to feel it. [verse 41] When the gradual process of dissolution sets in, the hallucinations produced by his evil karma will take the form of the terrifying messengers of the Lord of Death. They will seize and catch him by the neck with a black noose, and, in lonely torment, he will be bludgeoned with hammers. What help to him will be his close relations, his parents and family; what help will be his loving friends? No one, he says, will be able to protect him. For at that time, only the merit that derives from positive actionif it has been performed and accumulatedwill be of any help. This is the best, indeed the only, protection; and yet it is precisely this, Shantideva laments, that in the past he neglected and shrugged away.
What can he do? [verse 42] Crying out in misery, he calls upon his protectors, the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas endowed with great compassion. For he failed to understand what was to be done and what was to be avoided. He had no faith in the karmic principle of cause and effect. He was careless of his actions in thought, word, and deed, and has done evil things. Not realizing the dreadful horrors in storedeath, the bardo, and the lower realms in the next lifehe killed and did many other evil things in order to get the better of his enemies, protect his friends, and accumulate wealth and sustenance. And it was all for the sake of this present life, so insubstantial, so transient! In the hour of his death, he will have to suffer terribly and his lot will be wretched indeed.
[verse 43] As an example, Shantideva considers the predicament of a man convicted of a serious crime and handed over to the king for punishment. He is dragged away to the scaffold by his fellowmen, who will do no more than amputate his limbs. Even so, he is terrified. His gaping mouth is dry, his eyes are glazed and protruding, his face is livid and his head downcast. He is completely transfigured by terror.
[verse 44] This being so, Shantideva reflects, how will it be for him when he is caught by the evil messengers of the Lord of Death? Hallucinations conjured up by his bad karma, these phantoms are naked and seven times the size of a human being. Their hair bristles and they have glassy, staring, triangular eyes. Their fangs are visible, biting down on their lower lips and their hissing breath is as strong as a hurricane. Ferocious and seething with rage, they are armed with iron hooks, nooses, hatchets, and hammers, and, as frightful as ogres with their dreadful grimaces contorted with rage, they will bind him with ropes and drag him off to his next existence. There the terror of infernal darkness and the burning ground of hell will come to meet him as he is propelled forward by the irresistible hurricane of his karma. With cries of “Strike him! Kill him! Cut him in pieces!” the servants of the Lord of Death will catch him with their hooks, bludgeon him with their hammers, cutting off his arms and legs. No need to speak of misery and fear, he will be subjected to the most horrible tortures.
[verse 45] It is at such times that people cry out “Rinpoche! Doctor!,” calling to anyone who might have compassion. “Who,” they cry, “can save me from the terror of life’s end, from the horror of the servants of the Lord of Death?” They are terrified and gripped by panic. Because the skin of their faces is stretched toward the back of their skulls, their eyes are not closed but wide open and staring, looking desperately on all sides for help and refuge. But not even the Buddha can protect them from experiencing the bad karma that they have accumulated. When Devadatta fell into hell he cried, “Gautama, I am burning, I am burning!” [But the Buddha could not save him.] [verse 46] Then, when they realize that there is no protection, no escape, they will feel utterly abandoned. They will remember that they had been born in the southern land of Jambudvipa, a feat that was so difficult to achieve; that they had gained a human body endowed with freedoms and advantages, all so hard to gain; that they had met a holy teacher, so difficult to meet; that they had encountered the sublime Dharma, so difficult to find, and had even gained some slight understanding of what conduct should be adopted and what should be eschewed. Alas, the opportunity has been squandered in wrong action: Their conduct has been destitute of virtue, and much evil has been committed. There they are, defenseless and without a refuge. Death is now upon them, and there is nowhere to go but to the lower realms. Remembering all the evil they have committed, people tear at their breasts with their nails, their faces livid, their eyes brimming with tears. Their breath comes rattling in their throats, their heads and limbs shudder and twitch. And they die in great suffering. As it is said in the Rajavavadaka-sutra:
Every wanderer must die.
On your deathbed you will lie.
Just a little life remaining,
Fearful at Death’s servants and despairing.
Now your panting breath will cease;
Your nostrils flare,
And in your gaping mouth your teeth are bare.
All around, your father, mother,
Son and daughter, sister, brother
Each to each they will declare,
“All his wealth we now shall share!”
“Father, mother, son, alas!” you cry,
But only in the Dharma does there lie
Protection; there’s no helping grace,
No other refuge and no friendly place.
When this moment comes, great King,
The Dharma is the only thing
To shield and to protect you.
It’s your teacher and your home!
So it is that at the time of death, there is no security apart from the sublime Dharma and one’s good action. Shantideva wonders what a wicked person like himself will be able to do. For there is no escape; there is only misery and pain.

The strength of support

The strength of support may be used either as the object to which confession is addressed or else as the support for purification. In the present case, we are concerned with the latter. [verse 47] When the time of death occurs, the hallucinations called up by negative karmathe messengers of the Lord of Deathappear. In terror people look everywhere for protection. But there is none is to be found. Consequently, it is essential to resolve that, from this day forth, we will take refuge in the victorious and perfect Buddha. He is the guardian of all beings without exception, who, in order to protect from sorrow beings as infinite as the sky is vast, first engendered the aspiration to supreme enlightenment. He then labored for the good of all that lives, and became the great and powerful Protector, the Buddha endowed with the ten strengths.
For it is said that the Buddha possesses many powers: his physical strength that he received from his parents, the strength of his miraculous power, the strength of his primordial wisdom, and so forth. The sutras explain that the strength inherited from his father and mother was such that every tendon in his arms and legs was a hundred and even five-hundred times stronger that those of Narayana. The Shilakshipta-sutra tells that when the Buddha went to Kushinagar, he encountered five hundred strong men, each one accompanied by a further five hundred. They were engaged in clearing a road but there was a great rock that they were unable to lift and move aside. The Buddha raised it with the big toe of his right foot, and with his hand he tossed it in the air. Such was the physical strength he inherited from his parents. Through his miraculous power, he reduced the bolder to dust and scattered it in all directions. Then, on discovering that this was not what the strong men wanted, the Buddha gathered all the dust together again and formed it into the rock just as it was before, setting it in a position out of their way. He did this, it is said, through the power of his meditation or primordial wisdom.
Most especially, a Buddha possesses ten kinds of strength with which he protects beings. As it is said:
To know what is correct, and what is incorrect, and all the ripening results of action;
To know the different types of beings and their aptitudes and interests;
To know all different paths, absorptions, and the recollection of past lives,
Divine sight and the knowledge of exhaustion of defilement: Such is Buddha’s tenfold strength.
Possessing these ten strengths of knowledge, the Buddha perfectly instructed beings in the sacred Dharma. If we act according to his words, the fears and sufferings of samsara and especially the lower realms will be allayed. People who are confused about what is to be done and what is not to be done, and who fail to discern what is important, spend their entire lives in negative deeds. When death comes, they are filled with alarm and have no idea what to do. They look for protection, but there is no way to help them. It is just too late. This is not how we should act. If we hear about the Dharma in the morning, we must take refuge that very morning. If we hear of it at noon, we must take refuge at noon. If we hear about it in the evening, it is in the evening that we must take refuge, there and then, in the Buddha as our Teacherand from that moment on until we attain the essence of enlightenment. This is the way to think. We should receive the teachings, reflect on them, and meditate on them by turns. And when teaching the Dharma, we should not content ourselves with fine words only; we should genuinely reflect about what we are saying. If we do so, it is said that our explanation will itself be a form of meditation.
[verse 48] While on the path of learning, the Buddha gathered the two accumulations of merit and wisdom for many immeasurable kalpas. At length, beneath the mighty tree of enlightenment, he attained omniscient wisdom and declared:
Deep and peaceful, thought-free, luminous, unmade:
The nectar-truth, this now I have discovered.
Accordingly, the Dharma that resides within the Buddha’s heart, in other words, the Dharma that he realized, includes all the teachings profound and vast. If practiced, it scatters and pacifies all the terrors of samsara. Therefore from now on, we must take refuge in the Dharma of transmission and realization and take it as our path. Henceforth too, we must take refugeperfectly, straightforwardly, and without hesitationin the Sangha of the noble Bodhisattvas residing on the grounds of realization from which there is no regression. For they are our companions on the path.
[verse 49] Gripped by dread, Shantideva says, and beside himself with panicat the thought of death, of the bardo that will follow, of samsara and the lower realms that are awaiting him in his next existencehe calls in distress to the noble Samantabhadra, the first of all the Buddha’s sons, and offers him his body and all he has. We too must have this attitude. It is said furthermore that if, when making such an invocation, we are not genuinely afraid, we are in effect speaking falsely to the Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas, who are consequently saddened. In the same way, Shantideva offers his own body freely and without constraint to Manjughosha, the only sire of all the Buddhas.
[verse 50] Moreover, from the moment of first generating bodhichitta in the presence of the Buddha Ratnagarbha, the noble and compassionate Avalokita has labored lovingly for the benefit of numberless beings without the slightest trace of selfish desire or clinging. His inner qualities of compassion are thus harmoniously mirrored in his outer demeanor. At all times he watches over beings. His eyes never close, which is why he is called Avalokiteshvara, “the lord who sees.” With confident and irreversible faith, Shantideva cries out to him from the depths of his being and with genuine, unfeigned sorrowfearful of samsara and the lower realms, in terror at the approach of death and the bardo. In an agony of sorrow and in deep distress, he cries out to the noble and compassionate Lord Avalokita saying, “I pray, protect me now, the sinner that I am!” He confesses the karma accumulated through his evil deeds of body, speech, and especially mindfor it is from thought that words and deeds derive.
As [Dharmakirti] has observed:
Discursive thought is ignorance, the mighty demon,
That sends us falling down into samsaric seas.
Evil karmas arise from thoughts, and thoughts manifest because of ego-clingingclinging to “I” and “mine,” to self and other. And ego-clinging is nothing but ignorance. It is because of this that at all times, whether we are expounding the Dharma or listening to it, whether we are reciting prayers or meditating, our minds do not stay focused even for an instant but run after negative thoughts of attachment and aversion. This is why we fall into perpetual, interminable delusion. We accumulate negativity, which causes us to wander in the three lower realms in endless samsara. Shantideva acknowledges his wrongdoing and cries to Avalokiteshvara for protection from his evil karma.
[verse 51] Likewise, since we [monks] have all taken the full complement of vows but fail to keep them, we should rely on Akashagarbha, paying him homage, making offerings, and so on. This is important, for the Lord Buddha himself said that for beginners on the Bodhisattva path who commit downfalls, the noble Akashagarbha is like their walking staff.Likewise we should invoke Kshitigarbha, the loving and caring protector of those who are destitute and in decline, such as beginners in the monastic life, whose conduct is infected with defilement and is as yet but a mere semblance of monastic discipline. And we should call upon Maitreya and Sarvanivaranavishkambhin and all the other powerful Bodhisattvas on the tenth ground of realization, who reside in the buddhafields of the ten directions and whose prayers and compassion are extremely vast. To all such beings, we should fly for refuge, calling upon them by name and imploring their protection from the depths of our hearts.
[verse 52] To Vajrapani also, the glorious Lord of Secrets, at the sight of whom the messengers and henchmen of the Lord of Death (as well as the dogs, birds of prey, and all harmful beings, who hate us as though our hands were red with the blood of their own fathers) flee in panic in the four directionsto him, Vajrapani, whose mere appearance drives away all terror, we should go for refuge with faith and devotion. According to the general explanation, it is said that all the Buddhas of the three timesfrom the moment they first generate bodhichitta until they achieve perfect enlightenment, turn the wheel of the Dharma, and pass into their parinirvanaare watched over and guarded by the glorious Vajrapani, who wields a blazing vajra in his hand and crushes the heads of all who try to attack them, whether in thought, word, or deed. He keeps them company like the guardian deities that stay with worldly people from their birth. Furthermore, he is called Guhyaka, “the Secret One,” a name used to refer to yakshas. For he is indeed the lord of yakshas and is known also as Yaksha-Vajrapani. According to the particular explanation of the Secret Mantra, he is the spontaneous embodiment of the vajra-mind of all the Buddhas and has been empowered as the sovereign of the inconceivable secret of the enlightened body, speech, and mind. This is what “vajra in his hand” or “Vajrapani” signifies.
For us who practice the Mantrayana, it is essential to rely upon a yidam deityone of the Bodhisattva lords of the three lineages, or any other yidam deity to whom we feel personally drawn. One deity is sufficient and is indispensable. We must request the empowerment of our yidam deity and practice the appropriate visualization and mantra recitation, without ever forgetting it. We must be able to recall it whenever frightening situations arise, even at night and in our dreams. It is said that if we do so, we will have the vision of the yidam deity coming to welcome us at the moment of our deaths.
[verse 53] Shantideva confesses that he, a sinner, has transgressed the words of the Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas, that he has failed to act virtuously and did not turn away from evil. Now that he can see the terrors of death, the bardo, and the lower realms that are in store for him, he takes refuge in the great and compassionate protectors just as a man who has fallen down presses on the ground in order to pick himself up. And he prays that they might save him swiftly from his fear and suffering, the wages of his sins.

The strength of the remedial practice

In this chapter, as in the chapters on carefulness, vigilant introspection, and patience, the main point is the development of the appropriate qualities. In the present case, this means the creation in the mind of an antidote that will purify its negativity. To that end, we must meditate repeatedly on the karmic principle of cause and effect as well as on our life’s impermanence. If we have not yet acquired this counteractive state of mind by which negativity is purified, we should now cultivate it. If we possess it to some extent but fail to apply it out of laziness and distraction, we should meditate upon karma and impermanence. This will encourage us to apply the antidote as soon as possible. When this understanding has been fully developed and implemented, any virtuous action, provided that it is performed in conjunction with the three supreme methods, will act as a purification for negativity.
The three supreme methods are as follows. The first is the wish and intention to perform virtuous action in order to make a break with negative behavior. The second is to maintain, in the course of the action, an attitude of confession of one’s misdeeds. The third is to dedicate the accumulated merit to the purification of nonvirtue.
When accompanied by these three methods of preparation, the action itself, and conclusion, every virtuous action serves as a confession and thus constitutes an antidote. If we do not practice in this way, we may well spend our entire lives in solitary meditation, but unless we confess and purify even our smallest faults, using the practice as an antidote, we will have to experience their karmic results. As an illustration of this, let us imagine that a great many barley grains were planted in the ground together with a single pea. The barley will grow and the pea as well, for the growth of the barley will in no way hinder the growth of the pea. In the same way, it is said that however great may be our positive deeds, if we fail to focus on them with the intention that they act as a remedial force to our negativities, the latter will not be overcome thereby. Even good people can, in the next life, be reborn in the lower realms, for they may have in their minds the karma for such a destiny. In particular, their next existence will narrowly depend upon the mental attitude occurring at the moment of their death, for this will act as a bridge to their next rebirth. Those who do not know how to die properly should put every effort into the antidote to negative action, namely, confession. This is of the highest importance. Mindful of our negative emotions, the cause of lower rebirth, we should strive in their antidote, which is confession.
[verse 54] The reason why confession is necessary is illustrated by the example of a disease. If we are frightened by an ordinary illness, caused through the interaction of the three humors of wind, bile, and phlegm, we must rely on the medicine prescribed by a doctor and we must put up with whatever operations the latter performs on us: bleeding, burning, and all the rest. This being so, it goes without saying that, constantly afflicted from beginningless time by the diseases of craving, hatred, ignorance, and pride, we must follow the instructions of the Buddha, the supreme physician. We must reject what is to be avoided and implement what is to be accomplished.
[verse 55] Even one negative emotion, such as craving, or, otherwise interpreted, even one person whose mind is infected with defilement can bring low all those dwelling in the world, projecting them into the pains of the lower realms. But even if we were to search in all directions, other than the sacred Dharma, there is no remedy to be found that might heal the disease of the defilements. [verse 56] The best of physicians, he who has power to heal such ills, is the Buddha, the omniscient Lord. By means of his instructions, he uproots all the torments of body and mind. If therefore we neglect to follow the holy teaching set forth by him, and if we have false ideas about it, we are ignorant idiots on our own account and foolish in the eyes of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvasas well as the protecting deities who will turn from us in contempt. The great master Nagarjuna has commented:
More foolish than a man who takes foul vomit
With a jeweled and golden scoop
Are those who, gaining human birth,
Defile themselves with evil deeds.
This is similar to the Buddha’s saying that Devadatta was a foolish man, a drinker of filth. Jivakakumara was thrice honored by kings as the chief of all physicians. And he, in his arrogance, declared that whereas, in this world, the Buddha was a physician for the ailments of the mind, he, Jivakakumara, could attend to the illness of the body. The Buddha, however, thought to himself that if the pride of Jivakakumara were humbled and if the Dharma were taught to him, he would see the truth. He therefore transported him by miraculous power to the snowy peak of Himavat and told him to collect some medicinal herbs. Now Jivakakumara did not know what most of the plants were, but the Buddha, knowing them, explained them to him and thus humbled him. It was not enough, the Buddha told him, to have a modest expertise in medicine, which is but one of the minor sciences. Only the omniscient Buddha is the true physician, and apart from the sublime Dharma, there is no other medicine.
[verse 57] Thinking of the abyss of the lower realms, the result of evil action, Shantideva gives us a reason for the necessity of confession and purification. If, at the top of a flight of steps or on a small and ordinary cliff, we need to pick our way with special care (for if we fell, we might injure our heads or other limbs), it goes without saying that for fear of falling into the lower realms twenty thousand leagues below the earthto the Reviving Hell and similar destinations (there to remain in dreadful pain for a long age, an intermediate kalpa or more)we must act with the greatest care.
[verse 58] We are therefore advised to make immediate effort in virtuous living. This is the remedy. It is quite inappropriate to remain in a state of carefree nonchalance, telling ourselves that today at least we shall not die. For there is no doubt that death, the moment when we shall cease to be, is inescapable! We cannot be certain that death is not waiting for us this very night! As it is said in the Suhrillekha:
Life flickers in the flurries of a thousand ills,
More fragile than the bubbles on a stream.
In sleep, each breath departs and is again drawn in;
How wondrous that we wake up living still!
[verse 59] What guarantee can anyone give that we will not die today and that death is nothing to be afraid of? There is no one who can give us such assurance, not even a Buddha. What escape is there for us from the horrors of death? It is said in the Bhadrakaratri-sutra:
What man is sure he will not die tomorrow?
This very day you should prepare yourself.
The great hordes of the Lord of Death
Are they not your faithful friends?
Death, our own death, is coming. How can we relax in careless ease? It is highly inappropriate to rest at our leisure, eating, drinking, and amusing ourselves. As Ashvaghosha once said in his Shokavinodana:
Of all those born upon this earth
Or in the upper realms,
Did you see, or hear, or even doubt,
That some were born that have not died?
It is essential to overcome our bad habits, our wonted clinging to the objects of the senses. We are like pieces of paper that, once rolled up, always tend to curl up again. Therefore we should reflect as follows: [verse 60] In the past, there was not a single object of the senses that we have not experienced. But nothing now remains of the ephemeral pleasure arising from the contact of consciousness with its object. The initial moment of pleasure was unable to remain for a second instant, and it is no longer here. The experience of happiness has no enduring core. Likewise, however much we now enjoy the objects of our senses, everything will go; nothing will stay. What pleasure is left over from it in the second moment? What is there that, different from what has gone before, does not disintegrate? There is nothing. Yet here we are, clinging to, and craving for, the objects of the five senseson account of which we do not keep ourselves from evil and the sufferings that follow, ignoring every difficulty and fatigue, transgressing the words of our root gurus and of the Teacher of the triple world, the Lord Buddha, and his Bodhisattva children. It is thus that we are shipwrecked in this life and the next. We must not allow this to happen! In particular, because of our craving for meat, alcohol, and sexual pleasure, and the senseless practice of taking tobacco and snuff, we have indulged ourselves repeatedly. And since all such joys cease in the moment of their enjoyment, we yearn more and more for what is nothing but the bringer of ruin in this and future lives. This is why the teachings speak of the importance of cutting through all cravings for the objects of the senses, laying aside all important samsaric projects and simply forgetting about the smaller ones.
Realizing now that every pleasure is devoid of any abiding core, we must sever our attachment and craving. We are like children engrossed in play. There is no end to their games. Once we taste the objects of our desire, we are unable to drop them. Instead, let us cut through our clinging. Craving and grasping are the father and mother of existence. The extent of negative behavior is in proportion to the strength of our craving. On the other hand, if we sever the continuum of both craving and grasping, then even though an action is performed, its effects need not be experienced. It has been said that these last four verses constitute an essential instruction.
[verse 61] When we die, we will not be like modern lamas or men of state, who travel around with a large crowd of attendants. No, we will have to go alone. And this does not just mean that we will be without servants. When we leave our lives behind, we leave our parents, our children, our kith and kin, our pleasures and possessions. All that we have will be abandoned and left behind. A great king and a beggar are the same as two sticks: both must go alone, naked and friendless, their empty hands crossed on their chests, greeted by the approaching dark, thick and terrifying, pushed from behind by the red cyclonic winds of karma, with the dreadful heralds of Yama yelling, “Kill! Kill! Slash! Slash!” Through the force of karma we will be forced away to strange destinations we know not where, from the Peak of Existence down to the Hell of Unrelenting Pain. At such a time, we have no freedom of choice and we are beyond the help of friends or the attacks of enemies. Why then make so much of all our friends and foes?
[verse 62] What will harm us at that moment, however, is our own evil: the ten nonvirtues that we have committed through attachment and hatred toward friends and enemies, and on account of which we will have to suffer helplessly in the hells and other places of torment. So we should ask ourselves, how can we make sure to rid ourselves of evil, which alone is the cause of sorrow? This should be our only concern, as the text saysour sole and constant thought. This should be our daytime obsession and something that keeps us awake at night! It is thus that we should strive to confess our evil actions.
When cloth is being dyed, the preliminary washing is actually more crucial than the dying process itself. In the same way, it is because of [the dirt of] our nonvirtue that the qualities of study, reflection, and meditation on the teachings fail to appear in us. It is therefore said that it is vital to make an effort to cleanse our sins away. Once we have by various means awakened in ourselves the wish to confess sincerely and put an end to our evil behavior, we should bestir ourselves and get on with it.
Although there are all sorts of faults to be confessed and purified, everything may be summarized in two categories: actions that are evil by their nature and actions that are transgressions against established precepts. An action that is naturally evil is one that is negative regardless of who commits it. On the other hand, a transgression against the precepts or rules of ethical conduct is a violation by someone who is bound by such a rule. These two categories of misdeed are subject to four permutations. For example, if shramaneras or bhikshus, who have taken vows, kill someone, they do something that is both a transgression of their vow and also a naturally evil act. If on the other hand, they cut fresh grass, or eat in the afternoon, they transgress the rules but are not guilty of an action that is naturally wrong. If someone who has not even taken the vow of refuge kills a living being, that person has performed a naturally evil deed but not a transgression of the precepts. Similarly, if such a person cuts fresh grass, he or she performs a deed that is neither a transgression nor something naturally evil. Ordained people who fail in their observance of the monastic rule (even the prohibition to cut grass), are unable to keep to pure training. For the monastic rules are skillful means whereby the trainings are observed. They are like a fence with which the Buddha has enclosed the field of their discipline. The Buddha said:
Those who break lightheartedly
The instructions of their loving Teacher
Will fall beneath the power of pain.
They will be born as beasts, like him who, shaved and robed,
Cut down the mango tree and later was reborn as naga Elapattra.
[verse 63] Since therefore he has certainly acted in this way, Shantideva says that he is ready to confess all the evil, all the ten negative actions, that he has committed not knowing what was to be done and what was not to be done: evil actions that are said to be unspeakable and actions that are wrong because they are transgressions of the precepts, such as eating after noon. [verse 64] Whatever evil he has done, he will declare it in the presence of the protectors, the compassionate Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, with hands joined and with tearful eyes, the hairs on his flesh standing up. With a sorrowful voice he will pronounce the words of the confession in fear of the sufferings of death, the bardo, and the lower realms to come in future existences, with a mind filled with regret and remorse at the evil committed. Respectfully he will bow down repeatedly, confessing all his faults and downfalls, without concealing anything. The phrase yang dang yang (translated in the text as “ceaselessly”) is an expression indicating the depth of the remorse that one must feel.
Even though we are unable to behold the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, they can see us nevertheless. They are like well-sighted people standing in front of the blind. Consequently, if we declare and confess the innumerable faults that we have perpetrated, they will see us with the eyes of primordial wisdom no matter how many cosmic systems may lie between us. They will attend to us with their miraculous hearing, and will think of us in their omniscient minds. Indeed, it is said that they behold us directly and clearly.
[verse 65] Shantideva concludes therefore by praying to the guides and guardians of the world, imploring them to accept him as he is, a sinful man. It has been said that we should acknowledge and declare our faults as though the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas were questioning us about them.

The strength of amendment

To engage in evil action is like passing from light into darkness. It produces effects that are difficult to bear. For holy beings, such unwholesome conduct is an object of derision. Therefore, from now on, we must promise never to repeat such actions even at the cost of our lives. And when pronouncing such a resolution, we should consider that rays of many-colored light stream from the bodies of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and cleanse and purify our every fault and downfallevery negativity and obscuration of ourselves and other beingslike the sun rising in the midst of darkness.
There are two kinds of people: those who hoist aloft the victory banner of the Dharma and those by whom the banner of the demons is brought low. The former never commit any faults, whereas the latter commit them but then purify themselves with confession. The fact that negativities can be purified by confession is their (one) positive aspect. As it is said in the Suhrillekha:
Those who once behaved with negligence,
But later on assume a careful mien,
Are handsome like the clear unclouded moon,
Like Nanda and Angulimala, Ajatashatru and Udayana.
This ends the second chapter of the Bodhicharyavatara, called “Confession of Negativity,” which is the main topic of the four discussed therein.
