9 WISDOM

Whereby Precious Ultimate Bodhichitta Is Intensified

 Brief exposition

[verse 1] If each of the six perfections (generosity and so forth, as explained above) is regarded as being based on the perfection preceding it, it follows that the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom is founded on that of concentration. In the present text, however, we will follow the interpretation of the Lord Manjughosha our teacher.Accordingly, the Buddha, the great enlightened Sage, expounded “all these branches of the Doctrine,” that is, all skillful methods, which are contained in the five preceding perfections from generosity to concentration, for the sake of, or as auxiliaries to, the attainment of wisdom. This wisdom is the principal aspect of the extraordinary path and is the direct cause of omniscience; it removes the two kinds of obscuration and actualizes ultimate primordial wisdom endowed with twofold knowledge.It is as when a king arms himself for war. He is surrounded by the four divisions of his army, which go with him like auxiliaries and help him to attain his goals. In the Prajnaparamita-sutra in a hundred thousand verses, it is also written that, “Just as all the rivers that empty into the Ganges are carried along thereby to the great ocean, likewise the paramitas, when seized by wisdom, will lead to omniscience.” And in Ratnagunasanchayagatha it is said that:
Blind from birth, without a guide,
The teeming multitudes know not which path to take.
How can they reach the town?
When wisdom is not there, the five perfections are deprived of sight.
Unguided, they are powerless to reach enlightenment.
Yet when they are caught up and seized by wisdom,
They gain their sight and thus assume their name.
This is explained at length in the greater, medium, and shorter Prajnaparamita-sutras, the meaning of which in brief is to proclaim wisdom as the main and indispensable aspect of the path, thus revealing its great importance. Likewise, the expressions “branches” and “for the sake of,” used in the root text, are meant to imply that wisdom itself is the main factor.
In the digest of the Ashtasahasrika, the Prajnaparamita-sutra in eight thousand verses, it is said that:
The wisdom paramita is nondual primal wisdom,
Tathagata, buddhahood itself.
And to the texts and path that have this as their goal,
The name of “wisdom paramita” also is applied.
This means that in order to attain the perfection of wisdom, which is the fruit, it is necessary to hear and reflect correctly upon the Prajnaparamita texts. Then experience must be gained in the supreme method, the Prajnaparamita path, in such a way, however, that wisdom and skillful means are never separated. It is therefore said that all who wish to have the complete end of all the sufferings of existence, both for themselves and others, must diligently cultivate the wisdom that realizes suchness.
As it is said in the Bodhichittavivarana, when emptiness is realized,
The minds of yogis
Used to emptiness
Are turned with ease and joy
Toward the benefit of others.
This same text also speaks of “emptiness with the essence of compassion,” referring to the fact that, as the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas have proclaimed, the realization of emptiness occurs simultaneously with the birth of compassion. And out of compassion, emptiness is taught to others, so that all the sufferings of oneself and others may be brought to nothing.

 Detailed explanation

 Wisdom established by means of the view

 An outline of the two truths

 Distinguishing the two truths

[verse 2] All phenomena, of both samsara and nirvana, have two modes. There is the “appearing mode,” the mere appearance of things, in all their multiplicity. This is the relative truth. Then there is the “abiding mode,” the way these things really are, their emptiness. This is the ultimate truth.
These two aspects are, on their respective levels, incontrovertible, and this is why they are regarded as two truths. It is incorrect to say that the two truths are distinct on the ultimate level or that they are one and the same on the relative level. Both these claims are invalidated by four unwanted consequences.In fact, as it is said in the Sandhinirmochana-sutra, the two truths should be understood as being neither identical nor distinct.

 Definition of the two truths

It follows from what has just been said that the way of being of things, their ultimate truthsince it is free from all ontological extremes of existence, nonexistence, both existence and nonexistence, and neither existence nor nonexistenceis not the object of the ordinary mind. Indeed the intellect that thinks that things exist or do not exist and the language that speaks in these terms are said to be relative (“all-concealing”) and not ultimate. It should therefore be understood that the ultimate truth transcends the ordinary mind and cannot be expressed in thought or word. By contrast, the relative truth is defined as the deluded mind and its object.
Briefly, from the point of view of the ultimate mode of being, the two truths are not cut off and separated from each other with existence referring to the relative truth and nonexistence referring to the ultimate. For the scriptures say, “Form is emptiness; emptiness is form. Emptiness is none other than form; and form is none other than emptiness.” This being so, the dharmadhatu, the union of appearance and emptiness, is beyond the four, eight, and thirty-two extremes of misconception. It is inexpressible in thought and word. It is mind-transcending primordial wisdom, self-cognizing awareness. It is the perfection of wisdom, Prajnaparamita, the actual ultimate truth in itself. On the other hand, whatever the ordinary mind conceives and whatever language expresses: All such things, which thus become the object of thought and word, if examined, are found to be nonexistent. They are empty like mirages and it is never possible for them to withstand analysis. Therefore the Lord Buddha has said in one of the sutras:
If the ultimate truth, Devaputra, were to become the object of body, speech, or mind, it could not be accounted ultimate; it would be relative. The ultimate truth, O Devaputra, transcends all expression; it is utterly unoriginate and has no cessation; it is utterly beyond signifier and signified, the knower and the known. Insofar as it is not even the object of primordial wisdom, which is omniscient and altogether supreme, it is the ultimate truth itself.
Now when it is said that the dharmata (or ultimate nature) is not an object of knowledge, this means that since the dharmata transcends all conceptual constructs, it is not conceivable. Indeed, how could something that is neither subject nor object and is totally devoid of characteristics be properly called an object of knowledge? As it has been said:
People say, “I see a space.”
They certainly express themselves in words like these.
But how can space be seen? Examine what this means.
In such a way, the Buddha spoke of “seeing” the dharmata.
No other image can express such vision.
But though this is the case, when speaking in ordinary terms of how Aryas rest in meditation, it is quite all right to speak in terms of subject and object, and to consider the dharmadhatu as an object of knowledge. For as it has been said in the Madhyamakavatara:
Suchness is unborn, and mind itself is also free from birth;
And when the mind is tuned to this, it is as though it knows the ultimate reality.
For since you say that consciousness cognizes when it takes the aspect of a thing,
It’s right for us to speak in such a way.
Again, given that the basis for the division into two truths consists of phenomena as objects of knowledge, the ultimate truth in this context is referred to as an object of knowledge; this assertion is made from the standpoint of exclusion. This does not conflict with the earlier contention that the ultimate truth is not an object of knowledgean assertion made from the standpoint of detection.For one should have recourse to the intended meaning of the teachings.

 Concerning those who establish the two truths

[verse 3] With regard to the understanding of the two truths, one finds two classes or groups of worldly people. There are (Buddhist) yogis who are as yet worldly beings but who possess the qualities of shamatha and vipashyana; and there are ordinary worldly people who are without these qualities. And within the category of ordinary people, there are those who are disinclined to philosophical investigation and those who are not. The former are people who believe implicitly that their “I” is an unchanging reality. They regard their bodies as single, unitary wholes, and their minds as permanent entities. The latter are philosophers expounding non-Buddhist tenets, which, though they are very numerous, may all be subsumed under the two headings of eternalism and nihilism. To assert the existence of an eternal self and primal substance is an example of eternalism. To deny the existence of past and future lives and the karmic law of cause and effect is what we refer to as nihilism. All such theories, however, are successively refuted by the worldly yogis of the Buddhist tradition, who teach that bodies are aggregates of parts and not whole and single entities, and that the mind is impermanent, a process of constant change. The arguments that disprove the theories of eternalism and nihilism will be explained in due course.
Buddhist yogis who are still worldly beings, are, for their part, classified according to four distinct schools of tenets. The first is that of the Vaibhashikas (a Shravaka school). They accept the existence of external objects but reject the idea that consciousness can know itself. Their system has many distinctive features, for example the assertion of the five bases of knowledge objects, the existence of the past, present, and future as real (substantial) entities, and the belief that, apart from the simultaneous cognition by the senses of external things, the mind knows neither objects nor itself.
The Vaibhashika way of positing the two truths is as follows. It is said in the Abhidharmakosha that:
When objects are destroyed or mentally dissected,
There is nothing left of them for mind to recognize.
Such things are relative, like water
Or like vessels. All else is ultimate.
The meaning of this is that physical objects may be crushed and destroyed, for instance with a hammer, whereas things like visual consciousness may be dissected by mental analysis [to the point of being no longer understood as such]. Gross objects like these, which can be crushed or dissipated, have a relative existence. By contrast, the smallest constituent of material form, namely, the infinitesimal partless particle, and the shortest constituent of consciousness, namely, the indivisible momentneither of which can be destroyed or splitare held to have ultimate existence. These ideas are held in common by both the Vaibhashikas and the Sautrantikas.
The Sautrantikas (the second Shravaka school of tenets) assert the existence of the external object and the self-knowing mind. Their distinctive tenets are that extramental objects are concealed by the mental objects,that nonassociated conditioning factors are mere names, and that nirvana is a nonthing (without real existence). Nonassociated conditioning factors and nirvana are for them mere imputations. They assert that the mind is both self-knowing and object-knowing.
And within the context of the two truths, when the Sautrantikas refer to the relative, they [make a further distinction and] say, as detailed in the Pramanavarttika:
Everything that’s functional
Is here ascribed an ultimate existence;
The rest exists but relatively.
The one, we say, is specific, the other general in character.
In other words, all specifically characterized phenomena (both mind and matter) that are functional or causally effective are defined as ultimate; all that is not causally effective and is generally characterized is relative. For the Sautrantikas, “specifically characterized” (rang mtshan), “thing” (dngos po), “impermanent” (mi rtag pa), “functional or causally effective” (don byed nus pa), and “ultimate” (don dam) all have the same meaning. By contrast “generally characterized” (spyi mtshan), “nonthing” (dngos med), “permanent” (rtag pa), “nonfunctional or causally ineffective” (don byed mi nus pa), and “relative” (kun rdzob) are likewise synonyms. Some of these expressions, which seem to be in agreement with Vaibhashika terminology, in fact undermine the latter’s tenets. Both schools affirm, however, that the indivisible particles of matter and instants of consciousness are the ultimate truth; and in this they are refuted by the Chittamatrins, who constitute the third school of tenets.
The Chittamatrins reject the existence of outer objects but affirm the ultimate reality of self-cognizing consciousness. They disprove the theory of the Vaibhashikas and Sautrantikas concerning the ultimate existence of the infinitesimal partless particle with arguments such as that of the venerable Vasubandhu:
If six particles are joined to one,
This partless one acquires six parts.
If these six particles all coincide,
Then even heaps become a single particle.
If one particle is in contact with six other particles, above, below, and in the four directions, the question is: Does the central particle have parts or not? If it has parts, the so-called partless particle is divided into six. If it has no parts, then however many particles we assemble, the result will only ever be a single partless particle, and even gross aggregations like mountains would be reduced to a single particle. The particles could never produce extended objects, and phenomena could not exist. It is thus that Vasubandhu refutes the theory of indivisible particles.
The Chittamatrins also reject the view that the inward mental perceiver, that is, the indivisible moment of consciousness, is an ultimate truth. For the question is: In the mental activity of cognizing the syllables OM AH HUNG, do the two successive instants of consciousness which know OM and AH have contact with each other or not? If there is no contact between them and they are separated by unconsciousness, it follows that there is no link between successive instants of knowing, and therefore no such thing as a continuation of awareness. If, however, there is contact between moments of consciousness, the question is whether these moments have segments, some of which touch while others do not? If there are such segments, this means that the instant of consciousness that knows OM has a first part that does not touch the consciousness of AH, and a second part that does. And likewise, there is a first part of the consciousness of AH that touches the consciousness of OM, and a second part that does not. Thus, four parts are accounted for altogether. In other words, there is a proliferation and therefore no such thing as an indivisible instant. Again, if the instants do not have parts, of which some meet and some do not, then all instants become identical, and one ends up with such faults as asserting an immutable consciousness that is not divided into earlier and later moments.
Consequently, the Chittamatrins say that whatever seems to be an external object, in fact, appears only in the mind and exists nowhere else. All phenomena are therefore said to be mind, like the horses and oxen one sees in a dream. As for the mind itself, only self-knowing, self-illuminating consciousness, devoid of the duality of subject and object, is posited as ultimate.
In this tradition, the two truths are posited in the following way. All objects of knowledge are accounted for within three natures: imputed, dependent, and completely existent. “Imputed” refers to phenomena that appear according to a separation of subject and object. This is relative truth. “Dependent” refers to nondual consciousness beyond subject and object. This, according to the way it appears [in mental events or factors (sems byung)], is relative. According to the way it is in itself, however, it is the “subject ultimate” (chos can don dam). “Completely existent” indicates the ultimate truth pure and simple. The Chittamatrins consequently attribute true existence to the self-knowing mind, and this position is refuted by the arguments of the Madhyamikas, as will be shown in due course.
Madhyamaka constitutes the fourth school and attributes ultimate reality neither to external objects nor to the self-cognizing mind. The Madhyamikas say that all knowable phenomena are, in their very nature, beyond conceptual construction; they are the union of the two truths; they are equal. For this reason, Madhyamaka is supreme and enormously superior to other tenet systems. According to the acuity with which the two truths are investigated, the Madhyamikas are divided into two subgroups: the Svatantrikas and the Prasangikas.
Madhyamaka has two ways of positing the two truths. The first is in terms of an examination of the ultimate status [of phenomena]. According to this method, the way phenomena appear is their relative truth; the way they actually are is their ultimate truth. The second method is in terms of an examination of the relative status, the way phenomena appear. When subject and object appear in such a way that there is a discrepancy between the way they appear and the way they really are, this is the relative truth. By contrast, when subject and object appear in accordance to the way they actually are, this is the ultimate truth.
The faults of the lower tenet systems may be summarized as follows. The two Shravaka schools, Vaibhashika and Sautrantika, have two main defects. With regard to the relative level, they are self-concerned. As for the ultimate level, they attribute an absolute reality to the partless material particle and the indivisible instant of consciousness. The Chittamatrins say that the self-knowing, self-illuminating mind is the ultimate truth. Finally, the Svatantrika Madhyamikas insist on separating the two truths.
[verse 4] So it is that, through varying degrees of insight into the status of phenomena, there are, even within the ranks of Buddhist practitioners, those who are refuted and overmastered by others of successively elevated view. For in proportion as their insight into the nature of things becomes more acute, those equipped with valid cognition are able to refute inferior theories and not otherwise. In just the same way, as realization increases on the five paths and ten grounds, and their qualities are acquired, lower realizations and qualities are superseded.

 Refutation of objections to the two truths

 Refutation of objections with regard to the ground, the two truths

 Refutation of the objections of ordinary people

How are Buddhist practitioners able to disprove the point of view of ordinary people? It could be argued that, since ordinary people perceive origination and so forth as realities and are convinced of this (whereas the Buddhists reject such a view), there is no shared ground on which one side might invalidate the other. One says that all things lack true existence, the other that all things have it. There is nevertheless an example of something that both sides accept to be illusory and not real. The example in question is that of mirages or dreams, which, though they appear, are not in fact truly existent [in the way they seem]. Thus it may be demonstrated to ordinary people that, just as objects appear in mirages or dreams without actually existing, in the same way, all things, material form and so on, appear without really existing. By contrast, there is no commonly held example that could be used to show that something appears and also exists truly. It is for this reason that worldly people can never prove to Buddhist practitioners that phenomena truly exist.
At this point the objection may be made that, if all phenomena were unreal and illusory like mirages, what would be the point of training on the path with such activities as generosity and so on? It is completely unnecessary, like exhausting oneself trying to buy the mirage of a horse! The answer is that, although phenomena are found, on investigation, to be nonexistent, one must, for the sake of necessity (in other words, in order to achieve the goal), follow the path without subjecting it to analysis. And the attainment of the goal is necessary for the simple reason that, through the power of interdependent origination, the appearances of samsara and nirvana, though illusory, are inescapable.Until the dualistic fixation on subject and object is dispersed in the expanse of suchness, these same appearances will continue without interruption to affect living beingsto help or harm them as the case may be. It is as a means to dispel the sufferings of ourselves and others, and to acquire benefit and happiness, that we persevere on this pathnot because we believe in its real existence or in the reality of its result. It is like emanating a phantom army in order to deliver people from their [illusory] enemies or like trying to wake up someone who is suffering in his sleep.
But if the perception of things is the same for both Buddhist thinkers and ordinary people, what is there to disagree about? Actually, the disagreement is not about the existence or nonexistence of phenomenal appearance. No Madhyamika would ever deny the way things appear. [verse 5] The point at issue is that, when ordinary people perceive objects, they believe that they exist in just the way that they appear: perfectly real and absolutely existent. They do not have the insight of Buddhist yogis, who understand that though objects appear, they are like mirages and do not exist truly. This is the point on which they disagree.

 Refutation of the objections of the Shravakas

The Shravakas object that if all is emptiness and without basis, this runs contrary to the fact that there are forms and other things that impinge upon our sight and the other senses. [verse 6] To this the Madhyamikas reply that to claim that form and other sense objects exist because they are perceived is the unexamined assumption of worldly people; it is just the common consensus. When such things are examined, however, they are not established by valid cognition. For, as will be explained, they can be disproved by investigating whether the sense faculties contact their objects or not. The assertion that material forms and so forth are truly existent is as deceptive as the worldly opinion that the human body is pure and permanent, whereas in reality it is impure and transient.
It could also be objected that forms and other things must exist truly, since the Buddha affirmed the existence of the aggregates, elements, and the sense fields, and defined the aggregates as momentary. But in this case, Buddha was speaking on the level of expedient meaning; his real intention was only implied.[verse 7] Thinking only of the mode of appearancehis purpose being to lead the worldly (as yet unable to understand emptiness) gradually onto the path of the authentic Middle Waythe universal protector, the perfect Buddha, taught that things like forms exist. But on the ultimate level, the aggregates and so on, have no such momentary being because, on investigation, they are not established, either in the singular or plural;they are without origin or cessation.
The Shravakas say, however, that if momentariness is not the ultimate truth, it follows that, since it is a contradiction to posit it as the relative, it cannot be accounted for within the two truths. Both reason and the authority of the scriptures show how momentariness cannot be posited as the relative truth. For, given that the relative is defined as that which is commonly perceptible to all, it follows that momentariness should be perceived even by ordinary people. Since this is not the case, momentariness is not the relative. Finally, did not the Lord himself say that to see momentariness is to see the true mode of being of phenomena?
In reply to this, we might say that the ordinary minds of worldly people are deceived by the illusion created by the arising of a series of different entities that seem the same; they are unaware that objects like pots are momentary. But yogis who contemplate the mode of being of the conventional level see and ascertain the momentary nature of phenomenawhich is therefore relative for them.[verse 8] Consequently, the objection mentioned above that momentariness is not accounted for in either of the two truths is resolved. In relation to ordinary people, who conceive of things as permanent and unchanging, the insight of yogis into momentariness represents a kind of ultimate nature within the boundaries of the conventional. Otherwise, if there were no difference between the way yogis and ordinary people understand the way things are on the relative level, it would follow that clear insight into the impurity of the human body by one who meditates on ugliness could be invalidated by ordinary people, who perceive it as puresince the understanding of the nature of things of both parties would be on a level. Thus, while the insight of yogis into the body’s impurity invalidates the ordinary perception of the body’s purity, that insight cannot itself be invalidated.
But if, the Shravakas will say, all phenomena are unreal and mere illusions, then the Buddha himself is an illusion too. That being so, how could merit be gained from making offerings to him? [verse 9] The answer to this is that illusory offerings made to the illusory Buddha give rise to illusory merit, in the same way that the Shravakas consider real merit to be accumulated by making real offerings to a real Buddha. The only difference lies in the respective reality or nonreality of the merit (and of the Buddha); it does not lie in the arising or nonarising of such merit.
Again, how, if beings are like illusions, could they be reborn after death? They ought to be like the horses and oxen of a magical display, which, once they disappear, are not reborn elsewhere. [verse 10] The fact is, however, that as long as the ingredients, the magic spell, and so on, are assembled, the illusory display of the horse or ox will continue to manifest. In the same way, as long as the conditions of karma and defiled emotion are present, beings will continue to be reborn. Whether or not beings or illusions manifest depends on the presence or absence of the full complement of their causes; it does not depend on whether they are truly existent or not. But even if this is the case, it could still be argued that since samsara is beginningless and endless, sentient beings last for a very long time. This is not so with magical illusions, which cannot therefore be compared with them. No one is saying, however, that beings or magical displays are similar in all respectsduration, for example. Both may be short or long; they are said to be similar only because, although they appear, they are empty of true existence. How can true existence be attributed to sentient beings merely on account of their long duration? Indeed it cannot. Otherwise it would follow that, because some illusions last a long time and some beings last only a brief moment, true existence is to be ascribed to the former but not to the latter.
Again, if beings are illusory, it might be objected that, just as with positive or negative acts done to people encountered in magical apparitions, no merit is to be gained by giving them food and clothing, and likewise no sin is involved in killing them or harming them in some other way. [verse 11] To this it must be pointed out that even if one has the intention to help or kill an illusory man [created in a magical display], and even if one does actually proceed to slay or injure him, because no mind is present in this phantom being that could experience phantom happiness or sorrow based on such events, it follows that, aside from the subjective fault of intending an evil action, the sin of actual murder, and so on, is not committed. But in the case of sentient beings who possess minds (albeit illusory), merit and sin do arise on the basis of the good or evil done to them. In sum, the difference between living beings and magical apparitions lies in the presence or absence of a mind. There is no difference between them from the point of view of their ontological status (their real existence or illusoriness).
But then it will be argued that it is because beings have minds that they cannot be compared with magical apparitions: Their ontological status is different. But though sentient beings possess minds, these minds are themselves like illusionshow could they be truly existent? [verse 12] Because there is nothing in an incantation, or in the material ingredients for a magical display, that has the power to bring minds into existence, no illusory mind manifests. By contrast, the cause of sentient beings does have that power. One cannot say, however, that a thing is real just because it is produced by something able to produce a mind, nor can we say that a thing is not real when this capacity it lacking. A multiplicity of causes gives rise to a corresponding multiplicity of illusions. [verse 13] Nowhere in the universe is there a single cause able to produce the whole ensemble of extramental and intramental effects. From different causes, different effects appear; but they are not different [from each other] according to real existence or illusoriness. It is like apparitions of horses and oxen produced by magic. You might make a difference between them according to whether or not they have horns, but not according to whether they are real or illusory.
Those who hold that nirvana is a real entity (the Vaibhashikas) take issue with the Madhyamikas, who deny that things exist inherently. They say that the Madhyamikas believe that, on the ultimate level, all the phenomena of samsara are intrinsically nirvana and that relative truth is samsara endowed with the characteristics of birth, aging, sickness, and death. If this is so, they say, then because samsara and nirvana have a common basis, [verse 14] it follows that even if the level of buddhahood is attained, it must revert back to samsara. In other words, the exhaustion of samsara does not result in the attainment of buddhahood because [the Madhyamikas have said that] nirvana is actually samsara. Therefore what, they ask, is the point of practicing as a Bodhisattva in order to attain buddhahood? It is completely futile!
According to the Madhyamikas, this is not so; for there is a difference between nirvana that is the utterly pure nature [of phenomena] and nirvana that is freedom from adventitious defilements. [verse 15] If the stream of causes that result in different phenomena is not severed, there will be no cessation either of samsara or of magical appearances. But if the continuum of causes is interrupted, their effects will not manifest even on the relative level. And if they do not manifest on the relative level, there is no need to talk about [their manifesting on] the ultimate level. Therefore, for those who, through the wisdom of realizing the absence of self, uproot ignorance together with its seeds, there is no returning to samsara, for there is no further cause for it. The Buddha’s birth in this world was not a samsaric event. It was through the strength of primordial wisdom and the cooperating conditions of his aspirations and concentrations that the Buddha displayed deeds that were like a magical illusion, while never once stirring from the dharmadhatu.

 Refutation of the objections of the Chittamatrins

The True Aspectarians, a subdivision of the Chittamatra school,say that all things, which appear to be realwhether in the outer or inner sphereare like optical illusions or dreams. They have no reality outside the mind. Our perception of a physical environment, mental states, and other beings is due to the ripening of various specific habitual tendencies. Therefore, even though external things do not exist, the mind itself does; and even in dreams, it experiences objects, such as color. How, they ask, can the Madhyamikas say that external objects are mere illusions and do not exist and then say that the deluded mind itself does not exist either? For if it has no existence, what is it (since there is no mind) that observes the illusory object?
The Madhyamikas respond with the same argument. [verse 16] If, they say, the Chittamatrins assert that the illusory object has no reality, then, even if they claim that the mind itself exists, what is it that could be perceived? For if either of the two poles, subject or object, is lacking, it is impossible for perception to occur. The Chittamatrins reply, however, that, according to their theory, things are not held to be completely nonexistent. They are like objects, horses or oxen, for example, seen in dreams. Instead of a material object, the mind perceives a mental object in its place. This apprehended aspect is apparently an exterior thing but is in fact the mind itself, not something extramental.
[verse 17] The problem here, as the Madhyamikas point out, is that if the perceived illusory object is the mind, what object is seen by what subject? If the two are identical, no seeing can take place. And why? The Lord Buddha, the guardian of the whole world, has himself said that the mind cannot see the mind. [verse 18] Indeed, just as the sword’s edge cannot cut itself, just as the finger tip cannot touch itself, just as an acrobat cannot climb on his own shoulders, likewise the mind cannot see itself. As it is said in the Ratnachudaparipriccha-sutra, “It is thus: Just as the blade cannot cut itself and the finger tip cannot touch itself, even so the mind itself cannot see the mind.” The crucial point here is that as long as the mind is established as truly existent, it is partless and one; and this undermines the notion that it could be divided twofold into a seen object and a seeing subject. If something appears as an object, it cannot be the subject; and if something does not appear as an object, it cannot be apprehended as one. Therefore to say that the mind is self-knowing on the ultimate level is just words; it has no truth.
But why, the Chittamatrins contend, should the mind not know itself? It is, after all, no different from a flame, which sheds light on pots and other things and perfectly illuminates itself at the same time without relying on any other source of radiance. But to say that a flame “illuminates itself” is simply a conventional expression; it is not strictly true. [verse 19] A flame in fact has no need of illumination, for, since there is no darkness in a flame, what is there to be illuminated? If it were possible to illuminate something even when there is nothing to be lit up, the absurd conclusion would follow that a flame could illuminate even the sun and moon! Furthermore, if a flame is the object of its own illuminating, the same could be said, mutatis mutandis, of darkness, in other words, that darkness obscures itself. Consequently, if an object, such as a pot, were placed in the dark, it would be the darkness itself that could not be seen, whereas the pot itself would remain visible!
The Chittamatrins object, however, that in the context they are discussing, the illuminator and that which is illuminated are not two separate things. The flame illuminates itself by its very nature just as a lapis lazuli is blue in and of itself. A distinction can be made, they say, in the way that things are blue. There is a blue color that arises in dependence on external factors, as when a white crystal becomes blue by being placed on a blue cloth. On the other hand, there is a blue color, the blueness of which exists independently of any extraneous agency, as in the case of a lapis lazuli, which is blue by nature. [verse 20] In the same way, it may be understood that there are agents of illumination and objects that are illuminated [which are separate and interdependent], as in the case of visual consciousness and a visible form. On the other hand, there is also a consciousness that is by nature self-aware and self-illuminating, and here there is no mutual dependence between a distinct illuminator and a distinct object illuminated.
The example employed here by the Chittamatrins is inapplicable. It is false to say that lapis lazuli is blue independently of other factors. It appears blue due to an accumulation of extraneous causes and conditions; it is impossible to claim that at some point, and independently of extrinsic causal factors, it produced its own blueness. It is a mistake to say that blueness is self-producing.
[verse 21] Their intended meaning is also untenable. When it is said that “the flame is self-illuminating,” this is understood and expressed in terms of an “other-knowing mind” distinct from the flame itself.But in the case of the expression “the mind illuminates, [i.e., knows,] itself,” what is the status of the mind conceiving and expressing this? Is that which knows the mind to be self-illuminating identical with that mind or is it some other mind, some other knower? To state the first of these alternatives is clearly unacceptable here, since this is precisely the subject of investigation [between Madhyamikas and Chittamatrins] and it is not established. If, on the other hand, another knower is needed, different from the first consciousness, we will find ourselves with an infinite regression of knowers with the result that knowledge becomes impossible.
Moreover, if such moments of knowing [in this infinite stream of knowers] are not simultaneous, there can be no knowledge of past objects, [or knowledge moments], which have ceased to be; or of future ones, which have not yet occurred. On the other hand, if they are simultaneous, they must be independent of each other, with the result that, once again, knowledge is impossible. [verse 22] Therefore, if the consciousness (that is, the dependent reality) is not seen by anythingwhether by itself or by a consciousness distinct from itit is meaningless to examine whether it is illuminating or non-illuminating. To talk about the characteristics of something which is never perceived is as futile as discussing the grace and posture of a barren woman’s daughter. It is completely meaningless.
The Chittamatrins claim, however, that though they are unable to prove it on the basis of valid perception, nevertheless, the self-knowing mind is demonstrated inferentially. [verse 23] If, they say, the mind does not know or experience itself, then, being without self-knowledge or self-experience in the past, how could it remember anything at a later stage? Memory indeed would be impossible; it would be like having a result without a cause. Consequently, how is it that, when the blue object experienced in the past is remembered, the subject that experienced it (the apprehending consciousness) is also recalled?
The Madhyamikas reply that the fact that the mind can now remember that it experienced blue is not evidence that, in the past, it knew or experienced itself perceiving blue. The mind’s present memory of itself experiencing blue [in the past] derives from the earlier perception of a blue thing and from the fact that (in every experience) subject and object are always interdependent. (Indeed, one never finds a subjective consciousness of blueness divorced from blue objects.) By the same token, when one remembers a blue thing experienced in the past, there occurs also the recollection of the subject that perceived the blue. But this is not a matter of some independent consciousness apprehending blue separate from the blue thing formerly experienced. This is illustrated by the example of the venom of the water rat. Suppose in winter one were bitten by a poisonous water rat. One would, at that moment, be aware that one had been bitten, but not that one had been poisoned. It is only later, at the sound of spring thunder, that the venom begins to act and one realizes that one had been poisoned at the same time as being bitten. In other words, there occurs a newly arisen consciousness whereby one thinks that one was poisoned in the past.
[verse 24] The Chittamatrins go on to object that if it is true that those who have achieved great concentration in the practice of shamatha are able to see the minds of others, how is it that the mind cannot know something as close to it as itself? The mind must be self-cognizing! If one can see a hair at a distance, they say, one can surely see a rope close by! But there is nothing certain in this. The situation is rather like that of a certain eye ointment prepared with magical incantations and so on. When this is applied to the eyes, one can see things at a great distance or perceive things like treasure vases hidden under the earth. But one cannot see the ointment itself, which is of course very close to the eye.
But, the Chittamatrins say, if the mind is not self-illuminating and self-knowing, consciousness of other things is impossible. All conventionalities seen with the eyes and heard with the ears, and all mental cognitions, would be prevented. For they are all necessarily based on the mind’s clarity and self-cognition. They are impossible otherwise. [verse 25] The Madhyamikas answer that they are not refuting experiences such as sight, hearing, and understanding, which appear to have a satisfactory existence provided they are not subjected to analysis. For it is impossible to deny them, and there is no need to do so. What, then, are the Madhyamikas attacking? The cause of suffering: the belief and clinging to the true existence of all things. In this context, “things” are explained as referring to conventionalities validly perceived through sight, hearing, or the mind. And here, “sight” refers to sense perceptions generally; “hearing” refers to reports from other sources; and “mind” refers to the process of inference.
[verse 26] The view of the False Aspectarians, who also belong to the Chittamatra school, is as follows.They say that illusion-like objects, which appear to be external to the mind, are not distinct extramental things: The extramental object therefore does not exist. But in answer to the question of whether these objects, which are not different from the mind (for it is the mind appearing in their guise), are one with the mind, the False Aspectarians consider that they are not. For if [the illusory outer objects] were identical with the mind, this would undermine the latter’s oneness and partlessness. They say therefore that the external object is just like a mirage hanging in spacea groundless appearanceand that the mind is by nature free from all aspects. It is like a sphere of pure crystal. And they claim that this resolves any possible flaw in their position.
But the Madhyamikas reply that if the Chittamatrins hold the mind to be really existent, how can the aspect or object not be different from it? For they have said that aspects are unreal, while they believe that the mind is real, and between real and unreal there is no common ground. They may be frightened by this objection into admitting that aspects are not different from the mind. But in that case, the Madhyamikas say, if the mind is identical with unreal aspects, it follows that it is unreal as well.
But if the mind were unreal, the Chittamatrins reply, it could not be a perceiving agent. [verse 27] The Madhyamaka reply to this is that, in just the same way as an object, though unreal and illusory, is said by them to be perceived by the mind, likewise the mind, though unreal and illusory, may act as a perceiver of objects. This argument has just been used for purposes of refutation; now it is being used to serve as a proof.
The Chittamatrins also say that samsara is supported by dependent reality, the really existing mind. If the situation were otherwise, if the mind were not truly existent, samsara would simply be nothing, like empty space. It would be impossible for the appearances of samsara to arise, for they would be without anything to support them. It would be like having a pot without clay or a cloth without yarn. But if samsara is real, the Madhyamikas ask, is it identical with the mind, or different from it? If it is identical, it is impossible to escape from it. On the other hand, if it is different from the mind, this is inconsistent with the Chittamatra position (which is why they say it is unreal). [verse 28] But if samsara is like this, if it is unreal, it is causally ineffective. Therefore, even though it is supported by a truly existent mind, how can one be either imprisoned in it or freed from it? One cannot hold a rabbit’s horn in one’s hand and dig with it. An unreal thing cannot be supported by anything. If it could, it would become a thing, part of the sequence of cause and effect.
The Tibetan expression dngos med [translated as “nonthing,” “nonexistence,” “unreal,” or “untrue”] is used in two different senses. On the one hand, it is used to refer to what has no existence at all, even conventionally. On the other hand, it denotes things that are untrue in the sense of being like mirages. This is how Madhyamikas reply to those who believe in true existence, who, through not understanding that things may very well appear without truly existing, think that the “absence of true existence” means utter nothingness.
Since there can never be any connection between a truly existing mind and something that is unreal, it follows that the self-knowing, self-illuminating mind propounded by the Chittamatrins is solitary and completely isolated. [verse 29] But if the mind is without a perceived object, it is empty also of a perceiving subject. Now according to the Chittamatrins, when the “emptiness of subject and object” is actualized, ultimate reality manifests. So [according to their argument] this must mean that all beings are Buddhas from the very beginning, without needing to endeavor on the path. In which case, what is the point of elaborating a philosophical system saying that everything is mind? By affirming that all is mind, the Chittamatrins say that objects do not exist separate from the mind, and they claim to establish that ultimate reality is voidness of the subject-object dichotomy. Even so, what is the use of such a system, given that both these assertions (that of refuting dualistic appearance and that of establishing nonduality) have become superfluous? If therefore one asserts that mental aspects do not exist, it follows that the appearances of samsara are groundless, with the result that all experience becomes impossible.

 Refutation of objections with regard to the path, that is, emptiness

[verse 30] Even if it is known that all phenomena exist in the manner of an illusion, how could this understanding repel afflictive emotion such as desire? For it might be argued that a magician who produces the illusory appearance of a beautiful woman might himself feel desire for her, even though he has himself created her and knows that she is an apparition.
[verse 31] The reason for this is that the creator of the illusory woman has not eradicated the habitual patterns in himself of afflictive emotions (in this case desire) toward phenomena such as women. And so, when the creator of the apparition sees the woman, because his familiarity with the antidote to the passions, namely, emptiness, is extremely weak, how can he possibly resist the affliction of lust? There is no understanding of emptiness in his mind to counteract his fixation on real existence and the substantiality of things. If, on the other hand, he realized that the women encountered in his ordinary experience are not at all real, he would not feel any interest in an illusory one nor have any hope to have an involvement with her.
The root of craving is thought born from conceptual elaboration. Now [the realization of] emptiness gradually eliminates such thought-elaboration and leads to the destruction of both types of ignorance: all-labeling ignorance and coemergent ignorance. Finally, the mind itself assumes the nature of the antidote. It becomes like the mandala of the sun, without a trace of darkness, so that even the subtlest seeds of such ignorance are eliminated, never to return.
It may be objected here that since belief in the reality of phenomena and the conviction of the truth of emptiness both lie within the purview of conceptuality, it follows that, come what may, we are caught in the web of thoughtslike elephants washing themselves in mud. How can we ever put a stop to conceptual activity?
[verse 32] The answer is that when people cultivate the habit of considering all phenomena as empty of inherent existence (an attitude that runs contrary to fixation), they are ridding themselves of the ingrained belief in the reality of things. At the same time, by using the argument of dependent origination, they will also conclude that even the conviction in the unreality of phenomena is merely one thought supplanting another, and that it cannot in itself be the true mode of being of phenomena. Meditating on the fact that both the reality and unreality of things are completely lacking in true existence, they will finally overcome even their clinging to emptiness or nonexistence. As it is said, “Existence and nonexistence both are inexistent. The Bodhisattva who knows this is free indeed from samsara.” And Nagarjuna says in his Lokatitastava:
That conceptualization might be relinquished,
You have taught the ambrosia of voidness;
And whatever clinging there might be to this,
That indeed you have yourself discarded.
Given, however, that the real existence of phenomena is disproved, how is it possible, some people ask, to refute the nonexistence of phenomena as well? When the nonexistence of something is refuted, its existence returns. For denial of nonexistence is the assertion of existence, and the reality of a thing is the contrary of its unreality.
The fact is that we have the habit, from time without beginning, of taking phenomena as truly existent; for this reason we must establish, and accustom ourselves to, their nonexistence. For indeed, if we do not understand that phenomena lack inherent existence, the moment of certainty as to their ultimate nature beyond all ontological extremes will never come to us. Nevertheless, mere nonexistence is not the ultimate mode of being. [verse 33] When things, such as material forms, are examined and analyzed, nothing at all is found. One discovers that the object under investigation, on the relative plane, has no existence, no origin, and so forth from its own side. At that point, the nonexistence (dngos med) of that object (posited in relation to its real existence) is thus deprived of all support (since there is nothing there), and consequently, there is no way in which it can present itself as a conceptual target to the mind. It is just like the son of a barren woman: If he is not born, it is impossible to conceive of his dying. This is to say that nonexistence is posited only on the basis of a supposed existence. It is not an independent entity in its own right.
[verse 34] Therefore, when neither the thing (to be negated) nor the nonexistence of the thing (the negation thereof) are present to the mind, no alternatives for true existence remain (in terms of being both existent and nonexistent or neither existent nor nonexistent). Consequently, the mind has no other object to fix on, no ideas like “It is empty” or “It is not empty.” All conceptual activity is brought to complete stillness. This is a state of equality, which is like the abyss of space. There is no name for it; it is beyond thought and explanation, perfectly revealed only by self-cognizing awareness wisdom. It is said in The Praise to the Mother:
No name, no thought, no explanation is there for the Wisdom that has Gone Beyond;
Unceasing and unborn, the very character of space.
It is the sphere of awareness-wisdom self-cognizing:
To this, the mother of the Buddhas past, present, and to come, I bow.
And in the Mulamadhyamaka-karika, it is said:
It is not known through other sources, it is peace;
And not through mind’s construction can it be constructed;
Free of thought, it is beyond distinctions:
This describes the character of suchness.
And again we find, “Since this is the ultimate mode of being, Bodhisattvas who entertain the notion ‘The aggregates are empty’ are enmeshed in ideas of characteristics. They have no faith in the unborn nature [of phenomena].” And:
The Buddhas say that voidness
Is the banishment of all assertion;
Those who “have a view” of voidness,
Are barred, they say, from its accomplishment.

 Refutation of objections with regard to the fruit, that is, the benefit of others

When the level of buddhahood is attained, all discursive thought dissolves into the expanse of emptiness, and as a consequence, the concept of endeavoring for the sake of others cannot occur. How then is it possible to work for the benefit of beings?
[verse 35] It is just as with the wish-fulfilling jewel or the tree of miracles, which, while not having the intention to benefit anyone, nevertheless perfectly satisfy the hopes of those who pray before them. In just the same way, through the power of their former aspirations, Buddhas appear in forms appropriate to the needs of beings and constantly deploy their activity for the happiness and good of all, setting forth the Doctrine and so on. One who has attained the ultimate nirvana, wherein all efforts made along the path of training are completely stilled, and which never diverges from the dharmadhatu, has no concept of endeavor, and yet activity occurs for the welfare of beings. This, as we have said, is illustrated by the wishing jewel and other things, as well as eight further examples such as the reflection of Indra.
It could of course be objected that if, at the present moment, a Buddha does not strive to accomplish the benefit of a given being through any specific miraculous work, how could such a thing come about through aspirations made in the past? But why should it not be so? [verse 36] The case is no different from that of the brahmin Shangku who once accomplished the magical enchantment of the garuda.Because of the power infused into them by the brahmin’s mantra and concentration, the sacred objects, such as the shrines or images of the garuda, which he made of earth and stone, had, for all who saw them, the capacity to counteract any ailment caused by the nagas and so on. And for a long time after the brahmin had passed away, these objects manifestly retained the power to counteract poison and evil influences. In the same way, why should the welfare of beings not be accomplished now without any effort being made, through an impetus set in motion beforehand?
[verse 37] A similar thing may be said for the supreme Bodhisattvas, who, in accordance with their tremendous exploits in the twofold accumulation directed at enlightenment, achieve the sacred object of enlightenment, that is, the level of buddhahood. Although such Bodhisattvas pass beyond suffering into the dharmadhatu, which abides in neither extreme, and although all their labors and dualistic mental activity now completely subside, they nevertheless effect the temporary and ultimate welfare of other beings.
An objection is raised at this point with regard to the making of offerings. The merit accruing from an offering depends on the interaction of one who offers and of someone else who consciously accepts the oblation. [verse 38] But if the Buddhas do not have thoughts or intentions, how can something offered to them give rise to merit? Of course, if nothing results from making offerings to inanimate objects, it must follow that nothing will be gained from making offerings to the relics of the Tathagatas or to stupas. Nevertheless, it is asserted repeatedly in scriptures such as the Maitreyamahasimhanada-sutra that the merit arising from making offerings to a living Buddha and the merit of offering to his or her mortal remains, or to stupas containing them, after such a Buddha has passed into nirvana, are one and the same. As it has been said:
Offerings made to me today,
And those made in the future to my relics:
Both have equal merit and the same result.
[verse 39] Therefore, regardless of whether one considers (as Madhyamikas do) that the Buddhas themselves and the merit gained from making offerings to them are just illusions on the level of relative truth, or whether one believes (as do those who raised this objection) that both exist truly in an ultimate sense, the merit gained from making such offerings is extremely great. There is scriptural authority for this assertion. To repeat, just as the making of offerings to a truly existent Buddha is productive of merit, in the same way, illusion-like merits arise from making offerings to a Buddha devoid of true existence. Both positions, in fact, have the support of scripture.

 Proofs of the supremacy of the Mahayana

 The Mahayana is the Buddha’s teaching

There are in general four kinds of Shravaka: those who are emanations, those who will attain great enlightenment, those who are only journeying toward peace, and the so-called sendhavas, who have much intellectual pride.The latter two claim to see or realize the truth, though they do not, and are strongly attached to their theories. [verse 40] They say, for example, that the direct vision and assimilation of the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths(such as impermanence) is sufficient to achieve complete freedom, the fruit of arhatship. Since this is the case, what use is there, they ask, in realizing that all phenomena are empty, without inherent existence?
It is, of course, in the Mahayana that the emptiness of all phenomena is expounded, and it is out of fear, in fact, that the Shravakas reject it. They have no understanding of this teaching on emptiness, and yet they argue against it, claiming that they realize the No-Self of the individual person. Their objection is however futile. If the emptiness of phenomena is rejected, there remains no possible antidote able to uproot completely the afflictive emotions. This is why the scriptures, such as the Prajnaparamita-sutra, say that without following the path whereby emptiness is realized, liberation, namely, the three kinds of enlightenment cannot be attained. For it is said that for those who retain a belief in the reality of things, liberation in any of the three types of enlightenment is impossible. As a matter of fact, even the attainment of the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas cannot be reached without relying on emptiness, namely, the perfection of wisdom, which in consequence is referred to as the mother of the four kinds of noble beings or Aryas.
But the Shravakas do not accept the authority of the Mahayana scriptures just cited. They do not accept these scriptures as the pure word of the Buddha, but consider that they are writings composed, after the Buddha had passed into nirvana, by mere intellectuals under the influence of Mara, and that therefore no reliance can be placed in them.
[verse 41] Given that the Shravakas do not accept the Mahayana as the genuine teaching of the Buddha, the question how they prove the authenticity of their own scriptures should now be asked. The Shravakas say that their canon derives from the four texts of Vinaya, one section of Sutra and so forth, and it includes seven sections of Abhidharma. The authenticity of these scriptures, they say, is demonstrated by the fact that they are accepted by both partiesmeaning that there is no disagreement on the matter.
What exactly is meant by the expression “both parties”? The Shravakas must either intend themselves and some other group, or else they must be referring to two other authorities entirely separate from themselves. Let us begin by considering the first of these alternatives. The Shravakas themselves do not possess an innate certainty that the Tripitaka of the Shravakayana constitutes the Buddha’s word. So they cannot appeal to a commonly held opinion of “both parties.” On what grounds, therefore, do they claim their scriptures to be authentic? Since there is no intrinsic link between the teachings and the Shravakas, it is impossible for these scriptures to be established for them a priori as authoritative.
[verse 42] The Shravakas accept this, but they say, nevertheless, that there is good reason for trusting in their scriptures. First, they say, the Buddha expounded the Doctrine. Subsequently, his words were compiled by the Arhats and elucidated in their commentaries, and finally the Doctrine was passed down by the teachers of the lineage. Reasoning proves that their tradition does not contravene any of the three criteria for examining the doctrine; it is therefore a teaching that reveals the pure path. These facts, they say, show that their doctrine of the four sections of Vinaya and so on, is indeed the authentic teaching of the Buddha.
This is all very well, but the Mahayana disposes of exactly the same arguments to establish its own credibility. In the first place, the Buddha set forth the teachings. These were subsequently compiled by Manjushri, Maitreya, and others. Maitreya and Nagarjuna elucidated them with commentaries, and they were handed down by a lineage of teachers in whom we can have total confidence. Again, they do not offend against the three criteria for examining teachings and will be accepted by anyone who is intelligent and honest. This is all perfectly demonstrable, and these teachings may thus be established to the satisfaction of followers both of the Mahayana and Shravakayana.
In the second case, if by “both parties” the Shravakas mean that the common assertion of any two parties is sufficient to demonstrate the truth of a position, it follows also that the non-Buddhist doctrines, such as the four Vedas and so on, are also true. For they are believed in by many more than two individuals!
[verse 43] All the same, it might be argued that whereas, among Buddhists, there is no debate about the validity of the Shravakayana, the Mahayana is disputed, and this is enough to discredit it. But a doctrine is not disproved merely by the fact of its being objected to. If that were the case, then since the Buddhadharma in general is disputed by non-Buddhists, and since the different Buddhist schools (each with their specific tenets based on a particular aspect of the teachings, not to mention the eighteen Shravaka schools) all argue amongst themselves, it follows that the Shravakas should reject their own system of teachings as well.
[verse 44] The root of the perfect doctrine is the perfect monk, but to be a perfect monk is not an easy matter. It is said that five categories of men receive the designation of monk. There are those who are simply called “monk,” those whose vows are degenerate, those who are just the recipients of alms, those who are fully ordained, and those who have abandoned negative emotions. Of these, the first three are only nominally monks. The latter two are the best kind, and it is they who are the root of the doctrine. Of these, the supreme monk in the ultimate sense is the one who has abandoned negative emotion.
It is difficult (for the Shravakas) to achieve such a status, because it is impossible for them to realize the truth that brings about the elimination of negative emotion. For, as they themselves admit, they do not possess an understanding of emptiness, the true nature of phenomena. The state of the fully ordained monk also presents difficulties. This is inevitable since it is a subject of controversy, and the Shravakas have already said that all controversial subjects are to be rejected. By the same token, the four sections of the Vinaya scriptures should be discarded as well.
But why, the Shravakas ask, should they not to be considered as monks who have abandoned negative emotions? After all, even if they are lacking in the view of emptiness, they do have a complete understanding of the four noble truths. The reason given in reply is that the realization of impermanence and the other aspects of the four truths are not in fact the most important aspects of the path. What is crucial however is the wisdom of No-Self that completely eradicates afflictive emotion. This alone is the perfect remedy. Therefore, those who reject the doctrine of emptiness and whose minds are still engrossed in concepts will have difficulty in attaining nirvana. For without the complete destruction of clinging to self, there is no way to overcome afflictive emotion; and it is only through the realization of the emptiness of phenomena that clinging to self is uprooted. No other way is possible. Moreover, if the habitual tendency to assume the true existence of phenomena has not been eliminated, then even if it is temporarily suppressed by means of certain concentrations, it will later reassert itselfas will be explainedin much the same way as when one emerges from a meditative absorption of nonperception. Consequently, there is no other way of overcoming afflictive emotion than the realization of the truth. And by “truth” is meant the perfect comprehension of emptiness: the understanding that the self, the conceived object of the innate process of ego-clinging, does not exist inherently.
The Shravakas of course are in perfect agreement about the need to realize No-Self, but they do not consider No-Self and emptiness to be the same. For them, emptiness means the denial of phenomenal existence like material form; it is a frightening, nihilistic notion. By contrast, the recognition of the nonexistence of the personal self (which has never at any time existed) constitutes for them the perfect view in accordance with the true nature of things.
As a matter of fact, there is no difference at all between these two assertions of emptiness: that of the personal No-Self and that of the phenomenal No-Self. Personal No-Self means that the person is merely an imputation on the basis of the aggregates; it has no objective existence from its own side. Similarly, phenomenal No-Self means that even aggregates like a body, for example, or a pot, are imputed on the basis of their assembled parts. They are empty of themselves. The only difference between these two emptinesses lies in the thing considered to be empty. The understanding of the phenomenal No-Self undermines clinging to phenomena in general, while the realization of the personal No-Self acts against the root of samsara. Aside from this, there is no difference between these two modes of emptiness.
The Shravakas, on the other hand, claim that the difference between the personal and the phenomenal No-Self is very considerable. They say too that [the realization of] the phenomenal No-Self (or emptiness) is unnecessary: Liberation is attained merely through the realization of the personal No-Self. This means that, for them, existent phenomena are not empty, whereas the personal self, which has never at any time existed, is as unreal as a rabbit’s horns. They consequently have no use for the belief in the phenomenal No-Self. And so they debate, without realizing that a personal self imputed in dependence on the aggregates is in fact the very same thing [as the phenomenal self].
If one considers the matter carefully, it will be seen that the absence of a personal self and the absence of phenomenal self are of one taste. [These absences are] simply the emptiness of phenomena that are interdependently imputed. There is absolutely no difference between them. In view of this, the Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas do indeed possess a realization of phenomenal No-Self or emptiness. This is evident from the fact that, if they were without such a realization, they would be unable to overcome afflictive emotion. It is necessary to understand that the emptiness of the person (its lack of inherent existence) is just a case of the phenomenal No-Self or emptiness. The primordial wisdom, therefore, which realizes the phenomenal No-Self, may be regarded as the general term, while the wisdom that realizes the No-Self of persons may be taken as a specific instance, a lesser category. Conversely, the belief in the self of phenomena corresponds to ignorance generally, whereas the belief in the personal self is a particular case of this. It is like the relationship between the genus tree and the species juniper.
From the belief in the personal self, emotional obscurations like avarice arise. From the belief in the phenomenal self derive the cognitive obscurations, namely, the concepts of the three spheres.It should thus be understood that whereas the Bodhisattvas, who realize the two types of No-Self, have a wisdom that overcomes both kinds of obscuration, those on the Shravaka path only manage to eradicate afflictive emotion.
Yet again, the Shravakas say that afflictive emotions are eliminated through the realization of the four truths and that nirvana is thus attained, in the same way as a fire goes out when the wood has been consumed. It has however been proved that it is impossible to behold the (ultimate) truth without the realization of emptiness. And the position of the Shravakas exhibits a further drawback in that the realization of personal No-Self leads only to the elimination of the emotions and therefore not to ultimate liberation. [verse 45] The Shravakas contend that by simply overcoming afflictive emotion, one is liberated from all sufferings. This would mean that as soon as all negative emotion has been eradicated and arhatship attained, liberation from suffering should occur. For the Shravakas say that there is no more bondage. If this is indeed their position, it is apparently contradicted by the examples of the noble Arhats, the great Maudgalyayana and Kubja the Small, who though they were free from negative emotion, nevertheless suffered from the maturation of past karma. [verse 46] The Shravakas get around this difficulty by saying that even though the effects of karma were observable in their continued physical existence, propelled as it was by former karmas and emotions, nevertheless, since all craving, which is the cause for the taking of subsequent existences, was extinguished, it may be affirmed with certainty that they could never take another rebirth.
The Madhyamikas also hold that the Shravaka and Pratyekabuddha Arhats are no longer subject to rebirth resulting from karma and emotions. They deny however that they remain in the peace of nirvana like extinguished flames, as the Shravakas believe. On the contrary, they have all the causes unhindered for the appearance of a subtle mental body. And why? Because, although Arhats do not have afflictive craving engendered by clinging to self, they do have a nonafflictive ignoranceas the Shravakas themselves admiton account of which, the knowledge of objects is impeded through the effects of time and space.Likewise, there is no point in denying that they have a nonafflictive craving. For since they have not overcome the cause, namely, ignorance, they cannot in any way be immune to its effect. [verse 47] Craving arises from feelings, and even Arhats have feelings. This is an inevitable conclusion, since all the causes are complete. On account of their propensity to ignorance, and by virtue of the pure actions performed under the influence of thisand because they are not beyond the transference at death into inconceivable mental bodiesArhats are not completely liberated. The continuum of subtle aggregates is not severed and it remains for them to enter the Mahayana. All this is because they have not meditated, to the point of perfect realization, on the No-Self of phenomena; and therefore they have not eradicated the extremely subtle defilements that are to be abandoned.
Yet, the Shravakas ask, when Arhats die, how could the continuum of their aggregates not be terminated, with the result that they do attain the peace of nirvana? After all, the causes of rebirth are lacking; they are like lamps, the oil of which is all consumed. The answer the Madhyamikas would give is that such Arhats do not take rebirth in the world since the causes of reappearance in samsara, namely, negative emotions, are no longer present. Nevertheless, since they do not have a perfect realization of emptiness (the lack of inherent existence of phenomena), their minds are still oriented toward conceptuality and are attached to ideas such as “Samsara is to be abandoned” and “Nirvana is to be sought.” They are not in a state of perfect peace free from conceptuality.
[verse 48] As a result, their minds, which do not have a realization of emptiness free from all extremes, and still conceive of existence and nonexistence, come to rest for a time in the expanse of cessationonly to manifest and take birth again later on. For their minds’ latent propensity for ignorance, as well as their pure activity, continue to act as causes for the propulsion of their mental bodies. Because they have not gained a perfect realization of emptiness (the antidote through which all concepts vanish), they remain, as it were, in a condition similar to the absorption of nonperception or else in a state produced by this, namely, the condition of the insensate gods. Therefore, those who wish to go totally beyond sorrow should meditate on emptiness, for, without it, it is impossible to transcend suffering either temporarily or ultimately. With regard to the fact that, in the case just mentioned, ultimate nirvana is not attained, the Saddharmapundarika-sutra has this to say:
Thus you say that you have passed beyond all pain,
But from the sorrows of samsara only are you free.
You have not yet transcended every misery;
The Buddha’s highest vehicle you should now pursue.
And in the Uttaratantra-shastra, it is also said:
Until the state of buddhahood is gained,
The state beyond all sorrow is not reached;
Likewise with its light and beams removed,
The sun alone we could not see.
And again, in the Bodhichittavivarana we find:
The Arhat Shravakas,
Till the Buddhas call them,
Rest in wisdom bodies,
Drunk on concentration.
Roused, they take on various forms,
And work with love for beings’ sake,
Merit and wisdom gathered in,
They reach the awakening of buddhahood.
[verse 49] We will now consider other objections raised by the Shravakas against the authenticity of the Mahayana scriptures. They say that the teachings on higher mental training are found in the sutras; that those that deal with training in discipline are found in the Vinaya; and that there is no contradiction between those that expound the training in wisdom and the authentic Abhidharma. All these teachings, they say, must be accepted as the Buddha’s word. But since the Mahayana propounds the emptiness of phenomena, it runs counter to these same three trainings. This goes to show that, taken as a whole, the Mahayana cannot be the authentic teaching of Buddha.
But is it not believed that most of the Mahayana scriptures are similar to their own sutras? They may claim that some of the Mahayana sutras teach that it is possible to avoid the fruition of even the five sins of immediate effect; that some speak about an everlasting sambhogakaya; that others assert that it is unnecessary to abandon samsara; while others say that forms and so on, do not exist. All this is considered incompatible with the scriptures of the Shravakayana. But such objections are logically inconsistent. [verse 50] If it is claimed that the existence of a single sutra, expounding an uncommon subject peculiar to the Mahayana, and which is consequently not found in the scriptures of the Shravakayana, is sufficient to invalidate the whole body of Mahayana doctrine as being the Buddha’s word, why should the converse also not be true? Why should a single text in agreement with the sutras of the Shravakayana not be enough to prove the whole of the Mahayana as the authentic teaching of the Buddha? They do not have to be all similar to the collections of teachings of the Shravakayana. In point of fact, thinking of their compatibility with the three trainings, we may say that the Mahayana provides a much more extensive treatment on this subject than does the Shravakayana. As it is said in the Sutralankara:
Mahayana harmonizes with the Sutras
And it is in tune with the Vinaya;
Being profound and vast,
It does not contradict the truth of things.
Again, the Shravakas object to the Prajnaparamita-sutras. If they were the authentic teaching of the Buddha, they should have been understood by Mahakashyapa and the like and handed down by them through an uninterrupted lineage. This is not the case; therefore the Prajnaparamita-sutras are not genuine.
[verse 51] The fact is that the Shravakas themselves do not understand a subject the depths of which even the great Mahakashyapa and others could not fathom; this is the reason why they contend that these scriptures are inauthentic. But who would accept this as a valid reason for rejecting them? It is a well-known fact that the Mahayana is hard to understand because of its profundity. It is also possible to interpret Shantideva as meaning that the argument is weak because the Shravakas are not in a position to know whether Mahakashyapa and his confreres understood the Prajnaparamita or not.
It should be noted that some authorities have questioned the authorship of verses 49 to 51 .
 Proofs that the theory and practice of emptiness are the real solution
The objection may be made that if one were to realize emptiness, one would not remain in samsara and would not therefore endeavor in respect of the path and fruit. [verse 52] Although, from the point of view of the ultimate, there is no such thing as suffering, beings suffer because their minds are stultified by delusion. It is for the sake of such beings that those who realize the emptiness and mirage-like appearance of phenomena dwell in the worldwhich they neither crave nor fear, being freed from these two extremes. Though they abide in the world, they are untainted by its defects, like lotuses that grow in the mud. Now the ability to live in the world in such a way is indeed the fruit of realizing emptiness. On the other hand, it is precisely through not understanding the equality of samsara and nirvana that a mind sees faults in samsara and advantages in nirvana and leans exclusively toward the latter. [verse 53] It is therefore a mistake to find fault with the view of emptiness. Rather than being troubled by doubts, one should meditate upon it correctly.
[verse 54] To be sure, emptiness is the only corrective for the darkness of the emotional obscurations (the principal obstacle to liberation) and of the cognitive obscurations (which obstruct omniscience). Therefore, those who wish swiftly to rid themselves of these two obscuring veils and thus attain omniscience should by all means meditate on emptiness.
It might be thought that people do not meditate on emptiness because they are afraid of it. [verse 55] Of course, one would be right to fear something that causes suffering in this or future lives, but since emptiness brings about the complete pacification of all suffering, how can it be a cause for fear? There is nothing to be afraid of! [verse 56] If there existed a self, susceptible to fear, then of course anything frightening could alarm it. But since there is no self, who is there to be afraid? No one at all. Fear is inappropriate. Faintheartedness therefore should be cast aside. Let us be quick to meditate on emptiness!

 Wisdom experienced by means of meditation

 Meditation on the absence of self in individuals

 Meditation on the emptiness of the coemergent self

On the basis of the five mental and physical aggregates there occurs the thought “I am.” This “I” or self, which is identified with the “five perishable aggregates,” and which, in the absence of critical analysis, is assumed to exist, must be found somewhere among those five aggregates. No one would say that it was somewhere else.
Now through the application of wisdom, the mode of existence of this self may be investigated along the following lines. [verse 57] It may be inquired whether the self or “I” is the same as, or different from, one’s thirty-two teeth (for example)whether taken individually or as the whole set together. If it is identical, it follows that the self is inanimate, impermanent, and thirty-two in number, and also that it ceases to exist when one’s teeth fall outwhich is, of course, absurd! On the other hand, if the self is regarded as distinct from the teeth, it is also absurd to say that I am ill when my teeth ache. Moreover, what one refers to as a set of teeth is not something different from the teeth themselves, and it, [the set,] does not exist as such. Therefore it cannot constitute the self.
The same kind of argument may be applied in the case of the body’s twenty-one thousand hairs or its twenty nails. They are not the self. Neither is the self the three hundred and sixty bones of the skeleton. It is not the blood, nor any of the watery substances in the form of nasal mucus or phlegm. It is neither lymph nor rotten blood in the form of pus. [verse 58] The self is not the outer or inner fats, nor the perspiration of the body. The lungs are not the self; neither is the liver, nor the heart nor any of the body’s inner organs. It is not the body’s excrement, the feces or urine. [verse 59] The flesh and skin are not the self; the body’s warmth and respiration are not the self; neither are the body’s cavities, for instance the ears.
All these elements consist of many separate components, arising from infinitesimal particles. And all are impermanent. Neither individually, nor in the aggregate, can they constitute the self, for this would be in conflict with the very definition of a self. By the same token, the six types of consciousness, for example that of vision, cannot ever constitute the self, for they are a multiplicity and are impermanent.
A discussion of this matter is to be found in the Pitaputrasamagama-sutra. The elements of earth and water account for the body’s constitution, from teeth to skin; the element of fire accounts for the body’s warmth. Then there is the element of wind and that of space, corresponding to the body’s cavities, together with the element of consciousness. When these six elements come together, a personal identity is imputed to them and is the object of fixation. And yet the “I” as such has no real existence of its own.
The situation is comparable to what might happen in the gathering twilight when one cannot see very clearly. One sees a striped rope and thinks that it is a snakea conviction that will remain unshaken for as long as the circumstantial conditions persist. Applying this example to the question in hand, the rope corresponds to the aggregates, the gathering twilight and unclear eyesight refer to the ignorance that gives rise to delusion, while the conviction that there is a snake corresponds to the belief in a self-identity. To pursue the analogy, one may try to locate the snake, reaching out in the gloom with one’s hand, but even though one’s hand does not encounter anything, it is difficult to shake off one’s feeling that the snake is there, and one is filled with dread. In just the same way, one can examine the entire body, asking whether the head is the self, or the hand, and so on, only to find that they are not. Nevertheless one might still be quite unsure as to the nonexistence of the self. This only shows that the investigation has not penetrated to the crucial point. Now if a bright lamp were to be set up in the dark house, illuminating the whole place, no snake would be seen, but only a rope, and one would realize one’s mistake. One would see that there was no snake, and one’s earlier conviction would naturally subside. In just the same way, if this hesitant questioning is supplanted by a firm conviction that the self which is grasped at as the personal identity of the five aggregates is nothing but a mere imputation, and if one becomes accustomed to this, the absence of self will be clearly seen.
To this end, we have been told to examine where this sense of “I” arises, where it abides, and where it subsides. In accordance with this instruction, we should make a thorough investigation and should then simply rest in the state of finding nothing. When we are unable to continue with this, we should proceed with the analytical meditation described earlier. These two kinds of meditation should be practiced alternately. The first counteracts excited mental activity, while the second is an antidote for dullness and torpor.

 Meditation on the emptiness of the imputed self

 Refutation of the belief in a self that is conscious

The Samkhya school accounts for all objects of knowledge in terms of twenty-five principles. The self, according to their theory, is the purusha, which is conscious and experiences, or “tastes,” the flux of manifestation. It is not, however, the creator of it. It is a real, eternal entity, disassociated from the three gunas, or universal constituents, and it is nonactive. All objects of its experience arise from prakriti, the primal substance. This is the name used when the three universal constituents are in a state of equilibrium. These constituents are rajas, corresponding to pain; sattva, corresponding to pleasure; and tamas, corresponding to neutrality. This prakriti is the cause of the twenty-three modulations in the same way as clay is the material cause of a pot. From this manifests the intellect, which the Samkhyas call the “great principle.” From this, there arises the threefold sense of self, thence the five elementary principles, five elements, and eleven faculties. Both prakriti (the primal substance) and purusha (the self) are deemed permanent. Everything else is impermanent. Further, while the Samkhyas believe that the self is conscious, the Vaisheshikas and others hold the contrary opinion, that the self is unconscious. Now, if these two antithetical positions are refuted, all other [intermediary] positions will be disproved at the same time.
A self that is conscious and (as the Samkhyas say) permanent by nature does not exist. [verse 60] If the consciousness that perceives a sound is permanent, it must perceive sound all the timefor the Samkhyas believe that the consciousness in any given moment of audition is permanent. They reply that, although sound is not constantly perceived, this does not mean that consciousness is impermanent; it only means that it no longer has sound as its object. But if there is no object of cognition (in this case sound), what is consciousness aware of; what is it conscious of? What reason can there be for claiming that consciousness knows this or that object? It does not make sense. [verse 61] For if the Samkhyas say that something that is not conscious of an object is still conscious, the absurd consequence follows that even a stick can be conscious (of sounds and so forth). For it is still conscious even though it is not conscious of anything. To be sure, when there is no object like sound present, there is certainly no consciousness that is conscious of it. Consciousness depends upon whatever objects it is conscious of. It is not possible for something to be a consciousness without its being a consciousness of something.
The Samkhyas do not consider this a problem. [verse 62] They say that the consciousness which perceives sound earlier on can perfectly well perceive something else, say a shape, at a later stage. Consciousness is permanent; there is simply a difference of focus on individual knowledge objects.
But if the consciousness that previously was perceiving sound is permanent, how is it that when it later perceives a form or something else, it does not still perceive sound, since it has not discarded the (permanent) nature which it had before? When the Samkhyas reply that this is because the sound is not present, the Madhyamikas respond as previously: If the object is absent, the consciousness of the object is also absent. [verse 63] Furthermore, how can a consciousness that perceives sound change into a consciousness that perceives form? The two are essentially different. This argument militates against the idea that consciousness is both a permanent and single true reality. (It should not be thought, on the other hand, that the perception of sound in a single continuum of consciousness precludes the perception of form. For the simultaneous experience of several different nonconceptual perceptions is perfectly possible.)
The Samkhyas say, however, that just as a single man can be both a father and a son at the same time, likewise objects like sound and form do not exclude each other. From the point of view of modulation in prakriti, all form, if considered under the aspect of its nature, is the same as sound; for this nature is one and the same in both cases. Thus, when form is perceived, even though there is no perception of sound-modulation, nevertheless there is a perception of sound’s nature. This avoids (so the Samkhyas say) the unwanted consequence that auditive consciousness is impermanent.
The example that the Samkhyas give is invalid. When one says that a man is both father and son, one is merely attaching labels to him on the basis of two distinct relationships. He cannot, in any absolute sense, and by nature, be both father and son. If by nature he is truly existent as father, it is impossible for him ever to assume the condition of being a son, since in that case, fatherhood takes precedence over sonship. On the other hand, if by nature he is truly existent as a son, it is impossible for him to become a father, because it is impossible for [the truly existent state of] sonship to precede [a later] state of fatherhood. This whole matter is simply one of labeling. As such, we have certainly no intention of refuting it, and in any case it does not prove what the Samkhyas want it to prove.
[verse 64] If the man is simultaneously both father and son in an absolute sense, it follows that these (attributes) must exist in the three gunas, since the Samkhyas do not accept any absolute other than these. But the nature of sattva, rajas, and tamas (pleasure, pain, and neutrality) is neither “son” nor “father.” If all modulations have such a nature, in respect of whom, ultimately speaking, can the man be posited as son, and in respect of whom can he be posited as father? Indeed, it is incorrect to posit him as the one or the other.
[So much for the example that the Samkhyas use.] Now for the meaning, which is also invalid. If the apprehension of a visible form exists in the nature of the perception of sound, this ought to be obvious and clearly observed. But we have never yet observed the consciousness of form to have the nature of perceiving sound. In other words, no one has ever experienced a visual form with the properties of sound.
The Samkhyas reply that even though the perception of form as having the nature of the perception of sound is not a matter of experience, the nature of consciousness is nevertheless one. [verse 65] They say that it is just as when a dancer dresses in the costume of a god in the morning and as a demon in the afternoon; likewise, the earlier consciousness of sound appears later in the aspect of a consciousness of form, and thereby sees. But the consequence of this is that the previous sound consciousness is impermanent, because the earlier aspect is lost and another one is assumed. If consciousness assumes a new aspect, which is dissimilar from the first but is nevertheless considered to be one with it and not different (even though the two aspects appear quite separately), then, as Shantideva sardonically remarks, this is a kind of identity unknown anywhere in the world and is something that has never been seen before!
Things are said to be one or identical when they cannot, by their nature, be separated. They are said to be different when they can be so separated. So Shantideva is saying that to assert as one or identical what can clearly be seen to belong to two different categories is plainly contradictory. If things are seen to be distinct but are still one and the same, the absurd consequence follows that everything must be a single whole. Thus it cannot be that a dancer is [really] different at various moments (namely, when he assumes different guises) but stays the same ultimately speaking. If this is claimed, the same investigation may be applied as previously.
[verse 66] The Samkhyas go on to say that the variously appearing forms of consciousness, such as consciousness qualified by sound, are no more than deceptive appearances, contingent upon circumstances. They do not exist truly. It is just as when a white crystal ball becomes iridescent; the color is not truly existent in the nature of the crystal.
Although it is acceptable to say that the different types of consciousness qualified according to an object (as in the case of auditive consciousness) do not truly exist, Shantideva asks whether the Samkhyas can tell him something about this truly existent consciousness of theirs. They reply that it is just consciousness, unqualified by any object. It is a single entity of consciousness that is present in all [specific] conscious experiences, past or future.
But if this is the case, it follows that all beings are one, for this mere, unqualified consciousness is necessarily present in the mind streams of everyone. [verse 67] Moreover, the conscious self (purusha), as well as the twenty-four unconscious principles (prakriti and so on), would, by the same argument, have to be identical. For they are all alike in simply existing. On that level, there is no difference between them.
Finally, the Samkhyas say that various and specific types of consciousness, the hearing of sounds, the seeing of objects, and so forth, are untrue and deceptive and therefore have no true existence as separate things. But once one has totally discounted all specificity (of experience), what remains of this mere consciousness, which is supposedly real, single, universal, and, as it were, the general foundation? There is nothing left of it.

 Refutation of the belief in a self that is unconscious

The Naiyayikas believe that the self is, like space, all-pervading and permanent. This being so, it is unconscious, for if it were conscious it would be impermanent and nonpervasive. For the Naiyayikas therefore, the self is unconscious and inanimate. When, however, it is joined with consciousness, this self supposedly identifies experiences (happiness and so on) as its own and clings to them. [verse 68] But that which is mindless cannot, for that very reason, be the self. After all, even if they were to claim that a self which is similar to a jug or a piece of cloth could perpetrate an action and therefore be the basis of happiness or suffering, things that are unconscious could never actually experience happiness.
The Naiyayikas say, however, that although the self is not of the same nature as the mind, it is concomitant [or in partnership] with it; and due to the mind’s power, it cognizes objects. But this completely undermines the assertion that the self is unconscious and unaware of objects. For the self thus comes to acquire the awareness of something. By the same token, it also becomes impermanent. [verse 69] In any case, if it is claimed that the self is immutable and permanent, what object-cognizing effect could the consciousness produce in it? Obviously none. Consciousness cannot cause an immutable self to pass from one state to another, any more than one can make the sky blue by using paint! Their statement that the unconscious and inanimate thing, which, like space, is free from all activity, is the self is no more than a dogmatic claim. Alas, so much for the intelligence of the Naiyayikas!

 Answers to objections concerning the nonexistence of the self

 The nonexistence of the self is not incompatible with the principle of cause and effect

[verse 70] Those who believe in the existence of the self object that if, as the Madhyamikas say, the self does not exist, this contradicts the assertion that causal actions of good and evil are unconfusedly linked with their resultant experiences of happiness and suffering. For if there is no possible passage of the self, or agent of actions, to future lives, there is nothing that might experience the results of actions. Since [the five aggregates] arise and cease moment by moment and the agent vanishes the instant after the action is accomplished, it is impossible for such an agent to be affected by the maturation of the act. And since no maturation is experienced, and since it is impossible for the results of one person’s actions to ripen upon another, who is there to undergo the karmic result?
[verse 71] In their reply, the Madhyamikas employ the same kind of reasoning, pointing out that they and their opponents both accept that the aggregates which form the basis of an action and the aggregates which underlie the experience of its fruit are different from each other. On the other hand, a permanent self, separate from the aggregates on both occasions, would necessarily be unconscious and unchanging; and being unchanging, it would be inert or actionless. This, the Madhyamikas say, is a matter of simple logic and is as valid for their opponents as for themselves. Both parties must therefore abandon this kind of argumentation; it is nonsense to say that the relationship of cause and effect is invalid only for the Madhyamikas.The latter, however, go on to say that, whereas in their tradition they are able to resolve this difficulty, their opponents are unable to do so. For, they say, the Buddha, their Teacher, has said: “The result, O monks, of an action once performed does not affect inanimate elements such as earth and so forth. It ripens on the aggregates, elements, and sense powers that are assumed by a consciousness.” The result that ripens on the doer of an action is thus posited in terms of a single mental continuum.
[verse 72] For it is impossible to find an effect, the substantial cause of which has not ceased and is still present, for effects must manifest from causes. According to an alternative explanation, it has been said that it is impossible to find the performance of a causal action occurring in the same moment as the experience of its result, any more than a father and his son can be born simultaneously. Thus, at the time when the effect occurs, the cause has necessarily ceased. Nevertheless, by the ineluctable force of interdependence, it is certain that the effect will happen. Furthermore, this effect ripens wherever the causal conditions are all completein the mind stream of a specific person and not elsewhere. It is just as when seeds are sown in the earth. They spring up from the soil, not from rock. It is due to the fact that there is a single stream (one uninterrupted, homogeneous continuity) of the five aggregates, that the perpetrator of an act and the one who enjoys the result are said to be one and the samewhich is, of course, the opinion that people commonly hold.
The question may be asked whether this mental continuum does not in fact constitute a single self. It does not. “Continuum” is just a label. Like a garland, it does not actually exist as such. And it is easy to see that the aged and youthful bodies of a single life, and likewise earlier and later births, are not the same. [verse 73] With regard to the mind, it is said that past and future mental states do not make up the self, for the simple reason that, the former having elapsed and the latter having not yet occurred, they do not exist. The possibility of their being the self is thus excluded. But suppose that one were to consider the present thought, occurring now, to be the self. This would mean that when this thought passes, the self does likewise. In any case, those who believe that the self exists claim that it passes from the past to the present and from the present to the future, which means that the self cannot be identified with the present mental state. It is said in the Madhyamakavatara:
Qualities ascribed to Maitreya and to Upagupta
Are distinct and cannot be assigned to one continuum.
Phenomena that differ by their varying particulars,
Do not compose a single continuity.
Thus the theory that the mental continuum is the self is refuted. [verse 74] It is just as when one cuts open a banana tree, which is full of sap but is hollow and without any firmness or body to it. Gradually cutting through the fibers, one finds nothing substantial, and eventually the tree disintegrates. So too, if one searches analytically, one will find that the self has no reality, no ultimate existence.

 The nonexistence of the self is not incompatible with compassion

[verse 75] If there are no selves or living beings, on whom do the Bodhisattvas focus when they meditate on compassion? There is nothing to act as an object! In reply to this question, the Madhyamikas say that, on the ultimate level, there is neither an object nor an agent of compassion. “Migrating beings are never ceasing and are never born,” as will be explained later. If the state of mind beyond all reference is not perfected, compassion does not become completely pure and limitless. This is indeed the case.
All the same, for beings, who impute a self upon the aggregates and become fixated on it, it is undeniable that on the level of appearance, happiness and sorrow invariably arise. There is therefore a need to liberate beings into the expanse of nonabiding nirvana whereby the continuum of dream-like appearances of suffering is severed. This is why we take the vow to liberate them.
And yet these beings, whose burden we assume, have no existence in an ultimate sense. They exist only insofar as they are imputed as selves, through the force of ignorance. Consequently, although the Bodhisattvas realize No-Self, they take as the object of their compassion all beings who do not have this realization and who incessantly and pointlessly experience the appearances of suffering, through their belief in selfhood.
Likewise, the Bodhisattvas have no regard for their own welfare. They see that others suffer meaninglessly, and the attitude of cherishing them more than themselves naturally arises in their minds. They perceive that the suffering of beings is like a deep sleep and that they are able to wake them from it.

 A demonstration that the self as label is not refuted

[verse 76] If beings do not exist, it might be asked, who is it that attains buddhahood, and on account of whom is all the effort made? Surely, it will be urged, there is no sense in taking a vow to attain such a goal. The Madhyamaka answer to this is: Yes, on the ultimate level, this is perfectly true. The person who attains such a result, the beings on account of whom the result is gained, and the result that is to be attainednot one of them has true existence in itself. Neither, on the ultimate level, is there any difference between going beyond suffering and not doing so. But in the perception of beings all these things do exist. As we have just said, they are affirmed in ignorance. It is through our ignorant belief in the self that all that pertains to samsara, karmas and afflictive emotionsand likewise the opposite, all that belongs to perfect purityis produced. For what we call nirvana (literally, going beyond suffering) is nothing other than the exhaustion of the deluded mind’s thoughts. As the Sutralankara says, “Liberation is but the elimination of error.”
For one who, through ignorance, is enmeshed in dualistic mental patterns, samsara incontestably appears. And because of this, nirvana, the reverse of samsara, also exists. It is rather like a man oppressed by malignant spirits. He lives in the same kind of place as ordinary people, but he suffers because he sees demonic shapes and things that others do not perceiveand yet all the while he is in a perfectly wholesome and pleasant environment. In an ultimate sense, neither samsara nor the peace of nirvana has true existence. It is for this very reason that such things as bondage in samsara and liberation from it are possible; if they had real existence, neither could actually occur. This is a key point, which should be fully assimilated.
But why then, it will be asked, should we train on the path, why hope to gain what is unobtainablesurely every kind of confusion is to be dispelled? The answer to this is that, although on the ultimate level there is nothing to obtain, on the level of appearance, there is. For the sake of dissipating the sorrows of existence, and until the attainment of buddhahood, when ultimate reality appears directly, the ignorance of thinking on the relative level that nonabiding nirvana is something that can be attained should not be shunned. For it is on this basis that suffering will be removed. In the end, when one is free from every kind of dualistic concept, even the subtlest cognitive veils (arising from the firm belief in samsara and nirvana) are drawn aside.
This indeed is the level of buddhahood. But at the present moment, this is not possible for us. For us, the two truths are not in unionwhich is why the way things appear to us never corresponds to their true mode of existence. It therefore stands to reason that, in terms of phenomenal appearance, we should train ourselves with a view to gaining a result. It is true, we have to overcome the discrepancy between the appearance of, and the true nature of, phenomena, but for the time being we are unable. On the other hand, when this discrepancy is utterly eliminated, ultimate reality, where there is nothing to be obtainedand also nothing to be abandonedwill manifest. But until that happens, it is impossible to rid ourselves of the expectation and wish for the goal.
But that being so, why do we have to remove our ignorance regarding the self? In reply to this objection, it must be said that the two cases are not the same. The mind that seeks to obtain the fruit of enlightenment will extinguish suffering and will also put an end to itself, like wood from which fire springs and which is consumed thereby. [verse 77] The cause of all the sufferings of samsara is ego-clingingthe pride of thinking, “I am,” which is fed and enlarged by the ignorance of actively believing in the existence of a personal self. The ignorance that ascribes existence to the nonexistent self is what is to be overcome. Once it is dispelled, there will be no more clinging to self, and once that has been eliminated, there will be no further birth, no further turning, in samsara.
It will be argued that just as it is impossible to turn the mind away from the merely designated self, in the same way it is wholly impossible for the mind to overcome [the belief in] the inherently existent self. After all, our natures have been imbued with it from time without beginning.
Once again, these two cases are not the same.The sense of self that is just a label arises through the power of interdependence, and it is impossible for reasoning to prove that it does not appear in the experience of ordinary people. Moreover, there is no need to do so. On the other hand, belief in the inherently existing self may be annihilated by a mind that meditates on No-Self and realizes the nature of phenomena, just as darkness is scattered by the presence of light. This has the backing of perfectly coherent logic as well as reality itself. The view of self is a temporary deviation of the mind away from the nature of things and is due to extrinsic circumstances. Through the application of scriptural authority and reasoning, this aberration is overthrown. The mind thus penetrates the nature of phenomena, and since this is also the nature of the mind, the nature of things and the nature of the mind can never be separated. It is said in the Pramanavarttika, “The nature of the mind is luminous clarity; all stains are adventitious.”
To sum up therefore, belief in selfhood is the root of samsaric existence. As long as this is not eliminated, no matter what practices one undertakes, whether austerities or meditation, one cannot get beyond samsara. Consequently, it has been said that those graced with good fortune who wish for liberation should constantly make their practice a remedy to self-clinging.

 Meditation on the absence of self in phenomena

 Close mindfulness of the body

 Examination of the body in general

[verse 78] What we call “the body” is a mere imputation; it does not exist inherently. Our reason for saying this is that if a body, which is apprehended as a single (partless) whole complete with all its sense faculties, existed as such, it would have to be present in its members, for example the hand. But the various body parts, the foot, the shins and calves, are not the body. The thighs and hips, the waist and loins, the belly, back, chest and arms, and so on and so forthnone of these is the body. As Shantideva says [verse 79]: The body is not ribs or hands, armpits, shoulders, bowels or entrails such as lungs and heart. It is not the head and it is not the throat. What is the “body,” then, in all of this? None of these different elements in fact conforms to the actual definition of the whole body. Indeed, they appear to be related to each other, but like body parts scattered on a charnel ground, they do not make up a single whole. How could any member, left to itself, constitute the body? Moreover, a hand may be amputated, but the body is still considered to remain. What, therefore, is this so-called body, this aggregate of many parts? In itself, it is nothing.
Here it will be objected that, granted that the individual parts are not the body, the body nevertheless is a reality and is present throughout its parts. It should be pointed out, however, that if this is so, it means either that one “body” with all its parts is present throughout our whole anatomy or that an entire body is present in each of our physical parts (thus implying a multiplicity of bodies). [verse 80] If it is meant that the parts of the “body” coincide with the physical parts, hands and so forth, this means that the body’s parts correspond to the physical members in which it is present. But if we examine to see where this body, whole and entire, is actually located, checking off each part one by one, no single, pervasive body is found. [verse 81] If, on the other hand, an entire body, complete with all its parts, subsists in the hand and all the other members, this means that there are as many bodies as there are bodily parts. But this is impossible, since we cling to the body as a single whole.
[verse 82] Therefore, since there is no body, or rather since no body appears, when we search for it analytically within the outer and inner fields of the sense faculties, how can the body be said to exist in its parts? Obviously, it cannot. Finally, since there is no ground of imputation for the body, other than its parts, how can it be said to exist at all? It cannot. The root verse 78, beginning with the words “What we call the body . . .” shows that the body is not one with its parts. Root verse 80, which starts “If the ‘body’ . . .” indicates that the body is not something different from its interrelated parts.
[verse 83] Consequently, although the body does not exist as such, it is through ignorance that the idea “body” occurs to the mind on the basis of the assemblage of physical parts. Aside from being a mere label, the “body” has in fact no existence. It is just as when a pile of stones is mistaken for a man, on account of the similarity of its appearance. [verse 84] As long as the conditions are fulfilled with regard to a specific shape, the body will continue to appear as a man or a woman. But when these conditions are not complete, it will not do so, as when a change of sex occurs or during the development of an unborn child or when the body is cremated and only ashes are left. In just the same way, as long as the circumstances for the imputation of the body are found (that is, the interconnected physical parts), a body will appear. But in themselves these parts are not the body; they are just pieces of flesh and bone.

 Specific examination of physical parts

But even if the body does not exist, can we not still say that its limbs, the arms and so on, which we can see before our very eyes, really exist? [verse 85] No, just as the body itself does not exist truly, likewise the hand is simply a collection of fingers and so on, and is merely ascribed to the assembly of its parts. It does not exist as such. The fingers also are themselves assemblages of joints, and they too are therefore without true existence; and the joints in turn are divided into their separate sides and are therefore composite, not single units. [verse 86] Again, these parts may be progressively subdivided, from the comparatively gross down to the most subtle particles, and even the tiniest particle may be split sixfoldabove, below, and in the four directions. Ultimately, not one truly existent fragment can be found in any of these directional segments; even the fragments themselves disappear. Thus, if all apparent forms, for example the hand, are assessed by dissecting them in this way, going from comparatively gross to more subtle fragments, down to the directional segments of the infinitesimal particle, they are seen to be empty, like space; they have no existence as physical forms. Even the infinitesimal particle does not exist.

 The need for relinquishing attachment to one’s body

[verse 87] On investigation of its true mode of being, how could anyone cling to this physical form, which is so like a dream, appearing but devoid of inherent existence? It does not make sense to cling to it! Since the body is thus without inherent existence, what is the status of its particular character as man or woman? Neither category has ultimate existence.
Just as one analyzes one’s own body, so too should one analyze the bodies of other living beings, as well as other phenomena in the outer universe, such as mountains and continents, arriving at the firm conviction that they are like space, without inherent existence. Once this has been understood, and when all dualistic clinging to one’s body and the bodies of others has been rejected, all that manifests in the postmeditative state should be regarded as illusoryappearing but without inherent existence. And when meditating, one should rest in the natural state, spacious and free from conceptual activity. As it is said in the sutras, “Whoever, O Manjushri, sees that his body is like space is applying to his body the close mindfulness of the body.”

 Close mindfulness of the feelings

 Examination of the nature of the feelings

[verse 88] If the feelings of suffering in the mind stream are ultimately and by nature real, how is it that they do not prevent the occurrence of happiness? For they ought to stop happiness from ever arising, whereas obviously they do not do so definitively. The same would also apply in the case of an ultimately real happiness with regard to suffering, and there is no need to discuss it separately. Feelings are thereby shown to be without true existence in the mind. The text goes on to prove that, in respect of the external world, feelings such as pleasure are not inherent in outer objects either. If a beautiful form or a sweet taste and so on, are intrinsically pleasurable, how is it that delicious food or an interesting sight do not make people happy when, for instance, they are in agony over the death of their child or when they are out of their minds with fear? If in pleasant tastes and other phenomena, pleasure were intrinsically present, it would have to be felt, like the heat of fire. But this is obviously not the case.
[verse 89] Again, it might be thought that discomfort is present in the mind but that it may be overwhelmed by a particularly powerful sense of inner joy and therefore not experienced, in exactly the same way as the stars are outshone by the sun. But how can something that is not at all experienced be a feelinglacking, as it does, any such qualification?
[verse 90] Even if this last point is conceded, however, it could still be argued that when a powerful sense of pleasure supervenes, it is not that pain is not experienced at all, but that it is present in a very subtle form and therefore it is not recognized or felt, just as when a tiny drop of brine falls into a large quantity of molasses. But it is impossible for a subtle form of pain and a powerful sense of pleasure to coexist within a single mind stream. If it were, it ought to be possible for them to be felt at the same time, whereas this never happens. And since it was contended earlier that the powerful, gross aspect of pain may be suppressed by feelings of pleasure, how is it that the subtle aspect is not dispelled likewise, in the face of such a powerful antidote, as when something cold touches a surface that is totally suffused with a fierce heat?
Perhaps it could be said that the subtle pain does, nevertheless, exist, but that it is prevented from acting like pain. It is transformed by the powerful sense of bliss into a sensation of mere pleasurableness; it is experienced as a sort of subtle pleasure. It nevertheless remains what it is, like a clear crystal stained with vermilion, which looks red but is still a clear crystal underneath. To this it must be said that the subtle pain classified as mere pleasurableness is a form of pleasure; it is not pain at all. What purpose is served by calling it “pain”? And what difference is there in a mere pleasurableness that is pain experienced as subtle pleasure and a mere pleasurableness that is a subtler form of pleasure? What is the point of racking one’s brains to find such nonexistent distinctions, like trying to tie knots in the sky! These examples are themselves incoherent, yet they have been adduced as proofs. But what can they prove? Nothing at all!
[verse 91] Again, one might think that when the antithesis of pain, namely, a powerful sense of pleasure arises, pain is not experienced because its causes are not all present. But in that case, if the word “feeling” is attributed to something that has no reality, surely this is a clear case of merely conceptual imputation. For according to circumstances as they arise by turns, one can see that, when the mind experiences pleasure, there is no pain; when pain is experienced, there is no pleasure. Therefore to consider that so-called pleasure and pain exist in and of themselves and to strive purposely to gain the one and avoid the other is delusion. Aside from the imputation of pleasure and pain by the mind itself, there is no such thing as self-subsistent pleasure and pain, whether inside the mind or outside it. This can be exemplified by the effect of melted butter on a hungry person as compared with someone who is sick and nauseous, or the effect of a heap of manure on a person obsessed with cleanliness as compared with a pig, or the effect of a woman on a lustful man as compared with one who is meditating on the body’s impurities. Pleasure, and so on, arise by virtue of the subject’s thought; there is no such thing as a sensation that is intrinsically pleasant or otherwise.
[verse 92] For this reason, the remedy for clinging to pleasure and other feelings as though they were real and the delusory chain of thoughts connected therewith (wanting this, not wanting that) is the meditation that examines and shows that feelings have no inherent existence in themselves. Apart from this meditation, there is no other antidote to grasping at the supposed reality of feelingssomething that convulses the world with a kind of collective insanity. The contemplation or meditation on the unreality of feelings, arising from such a rich field of analysis, is the food enjoyed by yogis. Just as food satisfies and nourishes the body, likewise yogis, through the experience of pleasure free from desire, nourish the body of the qualities of realization.
Since feelings are the root of craving and constitute the main grounds for all disagreements and quarrels, it has been said that it is of vital importance to come to a clear-cut conviction that they are without any inherent existence, and to become accustomed to this. Whether one performs analytical or resting meditation as described above, the most important thing in the beginning is to acquire wisdom through listening to the teachings. It has been said that among the disciples of Buddha Shakyamuni, those who realized the truth were the ones who had imbibed the teachings of the preceding Buddha Kashyapa. In the future, therefore, when the Buddha Maitreya appears, those who listen to the teachings now will be born as the first of his followers and will see the truth.

 Examination of the cause of the feelings

[verse 93] A physical sense faculty and its physical object such as form are either separated by space, or they are not so separated. If they are separated, how can contact take place? If they are not conjoined, they do not meet, but are like two mountains, one in the east and one in the west. On the other hand, if there is no gap between the faculty and the object, the two become one. In that case, what faculty encounters what object? It would be meaningless to say, for example, that the eye is in contact with itself.
But could it not be argued that the faculty and the object simply touch each other, like the palms of one’s hands joining? No, the contact is only apparent and not real, merely attributed by thought. The reason for this is that a sense organ and a physical object do not have omnidirectional contact. If contact is made from the front, no contact is made from behind. According to this kind of analysis, particles that are separated from each other by other particles cannot be said to touch.
On the other hand, it might be thought perhaps that infinitesimal particles, unseparated by other particles, of the faculty and the object, should meet. [verse 94] Yet, the infinitesimal atomic particle of the sense faculty cannot penetrate the infinitesimal atomic particle of the object. Since they are partless, they lack all dimension with which to accommodate any kind of joining or intermingling. In relation to each other, they enjoy a status of perfect parity. On the other hand, if the two particles touch on one side only, but do not have contact throughout, they cannot be partless.
Leaving aside the particles that do not have contact, and considering those particles that do, if they were to have contact in all their parts, they must mutually interpenetrate and fuse into one. They do not however interpenetrate since neither of them has the volume that would enable them to do so. If there is no interpenetration, the particles do not intermingle. If there is no intermingling, there is no contact. For if two partless entities meet, they must have uniform contact in every direction; contact from only one side is impossible. [verse 95] How, therefore, is it acceptable to speak of contact between partless entities? It is impossible for them to have contact either from one side or from all sides. And so, Shantideva demands rhetorically, if ever contact has been observed between partless entities, let it be demonstrated and it will be established. He knows, of course, that such a demonstration is impossible.
Thus, with regard to the so-called union of object, sense power, and consciousness, Shantideva has demonstrated that the sense power and the object do not meet. [verse 96] If, however, it is contended that there is, nevertheless, contact between the mind and objects, he replies that it is unacceptable to speak of a meeting between a physical thing and the mind, which is incorporeal. One might just as well say that one could touch the sky with one’s hand or meet with the child of a barren woman. Of course, it will be said that it is inappropriate to cite such examples with regard to the mind, because the mind exists. It is not inappropriate, however, because the point at issue is the possibility of contact [between a material] and an immaterial thing. Even so, given that there is no meeting or touching, surely there must be some sort of convergence of object, sense power, and consciousness? But no, even this putative “gathering” is unreal, as was shown in the earlier investigations, for example in verse 85, “Likewise, since it is a group of fingers . . .”
[verse 97] Therefore, if there is no contact acting as cause, from where do feelings result? Feelings themselves have no existence on the ultimate level, and if that is so, what sense is there in exhausting ourselves in demanding pleasure and turning away from pain? The pleasures that people desire and work for are nonexistent. It is the same with suffering. Therefore, what suffering is tormenting whom? It is just the delusion of the mind, and the mind is itself illusory.

 Examination of the result of the feelings

If craving arises constantly in all sentient beings, how could feeling, which is its cause, be nonexistent? The answer is that craving too is no more than a delusion; it is not real. [verse 98] That which feels, namely, the mind and the self, and that which it experiences, namely, the feeling, have no inherent existence at all. When it is realized that that which feels and that which is felt are both without true existence, how could the result of feeling, namely, craving, not be averted, since its cause is removed?

 Examination of the feeling subject

If both the feelings and the one who feels do not exist, how is it possible to admit such perceptions as sight and hearing? [verse 99] By mentioning sight with regard to form and tactility with regard to physical contact, which are the first and last of the sense feelings, the root verse indicates the whole range of sensory experience: sight, sound, smell, and so on. None of them has true existence; they appear like dreams and mirages; they are simply our unexamined designations. They are mere appearances without true existence. Ultimately there is nothing to be found.
The question could be asked whether feeling and the conscious experiencer of it are simultaneous or not. Let us consider simultaneity first. If the conscious experiencer and the feeling itself were to occur at one and the same time, with the one coming neither before nor after the other, it would be impossible for the mind to observe the feeling. If distinct entities occur at exactly the same time, without the one preceding the other, they must both be completely independent of each other. Being different, they are unconnected. Therefore experience is impossible.
But what if they are not simultaneous, but rather the feeling comes first and consciousness later; what if the mind assumes the aspect of the feeling [and is thus able to experience it]? [verse 100] If a feeling precedes and the consciousness of it follows, it must be admitted that when the consciousness arises, the feeling is no longer present: It is just a recollection. Now all thoughts of things past are memories, and what is past does not exist in the present moment, and cannot, now, be really and clearly experienced. Feeling thus becomes impossible. If we examine the memory of something in the past, we find something that is deceptive. For what is past no longer abides as an object in the present. The consciousness of the past momentthe subject when the feeling was being experiencedis now no more; it can no longer experience anything. And logic proves that the feeling cannot be experienced by the present and future moments of consciousness. Consequently, the past feeling can now be experienced only as memory; the present feeling cannot be experienced; and the future is not yet here and so obviously cannot be felt by the present consciousness.
Neither can it be right to say that feeling is “self-feeling,” since it is contradictory to say that a sensation acts on itself. This argument is similar to the refutation of the self-knowing mind. [verse 101] On the other hand, as we have just explained, the consciousness that is distinct from the feelings cannot experience them either. That which experiences the feelings, the agent of sensation, has no true existence. Thus, such feelings are devoid of intrinsic reality. How then can this agent of experience, self-less and like a mirage or dream-vision, composed of a collection of aggregates, be affected by a feeling designated as “suffering” but which has no inherent existence? In truth, such an agent can neither be helped nor harmed.

 Close mindfulness of the mind

 The mind is without inherent existence

[verse 102] No matter where we look for the mind, we cannot find it. It is not located in the six organs of sense, like the eyes, nor in the six objects of sense: form and so on. Neither is it somewhere in between these two poles of experience. The mind cannot be located somewhere inside the torso, nor within the body’s outer limbs; and it cannot be found elsewhere. [verse 103] Whatever is body is not mind. But while the mind is not to be found separate from a body, as it were in exterior objects, neither does it mingle and merge with the body. But since it can have no independent existence, not even slightly, apart from the body, the root verse says, “Beings by their nature are beyond the reach of suffering.” As it is said in the Ratnakuta, “The mind is not within; the mind is not without; neither is it both. You cannot point to it.” And later, “The mind, O Kashyapaeven all the Buddhas have never seen it! They do not see it and they never shall!” And as the Prajnaparamita-sutra in eight thousand verses says, “The mind indeed is not a ‘mind’; the nature of the mind is lucent clarity.”

 The mind is unborn

[verse 104] If the mind, for example a visual consciousness, exists prior to its object of cognition (in this case a visible form), in respect of what object is this consciousness produced? For at that earlier moment, no object had presented itself, with the result that no subject could be generated. If, on the other hand, the consciousness and the object of cognition arise simultaneously, once again, in respect of what object is consciousness produced? If there is no consciousness present, a perceptual condition does not occur, and so it is unable to generate the consciousness. For if a perceptual condition has arisen, there must have already been a consciousness present, perceiving it. It is thus inappropriate to say that the object is the origin of that consciousness, since both terms are in that case (causally) unrelated.
[verse 105] If, however, consciousness arises subsequent to its object, again, from what does it arise, since the object of its perception has ceased to be? Does the object that has ceased continue to exist or not? If it still exists, it has not yet ceased and thus becomes simultaneous with the perceiving consciousness. If, on the contrary, something derives from it even though it does not exist, then we would have to say that a plant can arise from a burnt seed or that even a rabbit’s horns can give rise to a visual consciousness!

 Close mindfulness of phenomena

 Actual close mindfulness of phenomena
As we have just explained, the way in which phenomena, whether compounded or uncompounded, arise is beyond our conceptual grasp. Phenomena do not come into being before, after, or simultaneously with their cause; they do not arise from themselves nor from something else nor from both nor from neither. They are without origin; and what is without origin can have no abiding or cessation. Indeed, as it has been said:
Do not cease to be and do not come to be.
They have no ending and they are not permanent.
They do not come; they do not go.
They are not different; they are not the same.

 Refutation of objections

 Eliminating the objection that the two truths are untenable

[verse 106] It will be objected that if phenomena never arise or subside, and so on, the relative truthwhich is itself characterized by origin and cessation, coming and goingcollapses. And if the relative truth is not asserted, the ultimate cannot be retained either. What then happens to the two truths? They are reduced to one.
To this it must be said that the system of the two truths is propounded solely for didactic purposes, as an entry to the path. On the ultimate level, the division into two truths has no place. There is only the inconceivable dharmadhatu, pure suchness, the ultimate mode of being. As it is written in the sutra:
There is but one truth, absence of all origin,
But some will crow about there being four.
Yet in the essence of enlightenment,
Not one is found, why speak of four?
But whereas on the ultimate level, the two truths are not posited, on the relative level, they are. For there is certainly a difference between the way things are and the way they appear; and this corresponds to two truths as was declared earlier.
It may be objected that if, of the two truths thus posited, the specifically characterized things of the relative do not exist, the so-called relative is necessarily posited by something other than it, namely, by the mind. Being so posited, [the relative] occurs in the mind, which means that beings will never pass beyond suffering. For as long as beings last, their minds last; as long as their minds last, the mind-posited relative truth also lasts.Therefore nirvana, in which all dualistic conceptions of object and subject are exhausted, will never occur.
[verse 107] The answer to this is that these appearances of the relative, the continuum of which is insuperable, are what occurs through the thought-elaboration of individual sentient beings (which is “other” in the sense given above). They are like optical illusions, dreams, and so on. But this is not the relative that appears to someone who has passed beyond suffering.
This being so, it is not because others have dualistic conceptions that one cannot go beyond suffering, and conversely beings do not all attain the state of nonduality simply because the dualistic clinging of one individual vanishes into the space of dharmata. During sleep, objects appear like wild beasts, rivers, and so on, posited through the power of thought. They are not specifically characterized things. The appearances occurring during sleep cease in the experience of each individual who wakes. And though such things may continue to appear to those who are still asleep, they can have no effect upon those who have awakened. It is said in the Madhyamakavatara:
Both when we are awake and when we are not roused
From sleep, these three appear to be;
These same three melt away when from our dreams we stir,
And so it is when waking from the sleep of nescience.
If, after the attainment of buddhahood in the expanse beyond suffering (when even the subtle traces of dualistic perception disappear), the relative conceptions of origination and so forth were still to occur, this would mean that one was still caught up in the relativein other words, mental elaborations dependent on oneself.But this is not how it is. All the elaborations of the relative level cease to exist and this is therefore the state beyond suffering. Again the Madhyamakavatara says:
The tinder of phenomena is all consumed,
And this is peace, the dharmakaya of the Conquerors;
There is no origin and no cessation.
The mind is stopped, the kaya manifests.
Just as when the firewood is all consumed and the fire goes out, every idea of origin, and so on, subsides; all movements of the mind and mental factors are arrested without exception. This is the dharmadhatu. In this ineffable union of appearance and emptiness, like water mingled with water, the self-arisen primal wisdom beyond all ontological extremes sees all objects of knowledge, and yet it is itself completely nonconceptual. For it should be understood that when the activity of the mind and its mental factors come to rest without any further movement, ultimate primordial wisdom manifests. When self-arisen wisdom appears, the [ordinary] mind ceases. If, bemused by ordinary opinions, we were to think that the discursive mind cannot come to a halt, or that if it could, then (as with an extinguished fire) no wisdom would ensue, this would be a great disparagement of the Buddha. This fault is to be avoided through the cultivation of certainty concerning the profound meaning.

 Refutation of the objection that phenomena are inaccessible to reasoned analysis

[verse 108] It could be objected that if knower and known are both by nature empty, it does not make sense to analyze them. The answer is that, although the subject (the mind) and the object to be analyzed are empty by their nature, they are said to be mutually dependent. And since all analysis is conducted on the basis of the conventionalities of the common consensus in which things seem real as long as they are not subjected to close investigation, the analysis of them is quite tenable.

 Refutation of the objection that analysis must result in an infinite regress

[verse 109] In order to understand that all imputed phenomena are without true existence, the investigation or systematic examination made to show that all objects are by their nature unreal may itself be examined. But if so, it will be objected that the investigation cannot be the object of its own investigating. A first investigation must be examined [by a second and so on]; and in this way, the analysis must lead to an infinite regress.
[verse 110] In reply to this, Shantideva says that when phenomena are investigated and are found to be without true existence, and when it is ascertained with certainty that they cannot be characterized as produced or unproduced, analysis itself ceases to have an identifiable object or basis. When there is no longer any object or basis to act as a target, no analyzing subject will arise to focus on it. All concepts are stilled, and the analysis itself subsides like ripples on the water. This is called the “natural nirvana in the state of dharmata.”

 Misconceptions dispelled through reasoning

 A refutation of the argument of those who believe in true existence

[verse 111] The belief in the true existence of both object and consciousness, as put forward in substantialist philosophies, is very difficult to maintain, since it cannot be established by valid cognition. The proponents of such philosophies will of course say that consciousness is established as a valid cognizer and that therefore the very fact that, as valid cognizer, it observes things as existing is enough to establish that they do in fact exist. In reply to such an objection, however, the question need only be asked: On what grounds is consciousness itself said to be truly existent? It cannot, of itself, establish its own existence on the ultimate level, and if another consciousness is needed to do so, we find ourselves with an infinite regress. On the other hand, there is no other proof.
[verse 112] It could be argued perhaps that the existence of consciousness is established by the fact that it perceives truly existent objects. But in that case, what proof is there of the existence of the cognized object? If it is again said that the proof is consciousness, in other words, that object and consciousness both prove the existence of each other, then obviously the two are without inherent existence; they exist only through mutual interdependence, just like the relative concepts of shortness and length. In other words, it is impossible to use either term as proof of the other; [the argument is circular]. [verse 113] Ultimately speaking, neither of the two has true existence; it is just as in the absence of a son, one cannot talk about there being a father, since the grounds for positing fatherhood are absent. Likewise, if there is no father, where would the son come from (for he would have no cause)? Consequently, both are untenable. When no son exists, no father can be posited as having preceded him. And likewise in the context of consciousness and objects of consciousnesswhichever of the two is to be provenif one of them (the son according to our example) is not established, the other (a father) cannot exist prior to it in the past to serve as proof. In the end, neither of the two [consciousness and objects] has real existence.
[verse 114] Those who raised the objection continue by saying that they do not claim that the two terms mutually prove each other. Rather it is just as when a shoot is produced from a seed: The existence of the seed is understood from the presence of the plant. In the same way, consciousness, which is the effect arising from the object of cognition, itself demonstrates the existence of the object. Unfortunately, this example is inadequate. For it is not the case that the existence of the seed is understood simply by virtue of the plant. [verse 115] It is our minds, different from the shoot, that infer that the shoot (the result), was preceded by a seed (the cause). It does this by separately considering seeds and plants and ascertaining the causal relationship between them. If, however, a causal relationship has not been previously ascertained, [the existence of the seed] is not revealed simply by observing the plant. What therefore proves the real existence of consciousness, in other words, the very thing that is in turn taken as evidence for the existence of the cognized object? On the ultimate level, it cannot be established by a self-knowing consciousness, nor by an other-knowing consciousness.
It may be seen from this that it is extremely difficult to render conventional reality tenable from the point of view of those who hold to real existence. On the other hand, this is highly acceptable for those who say that [true existence] is just an imputation.

 An exposition of the proofs of those who uphold the doctrine of emptiness

 Investigation of the cause: the diamond splinters argument

 Refutation of the belief in uncaused origination

Philosophical schools, such as that of the Charvakas, argue that just as no one made the sharpness of a thorn or the brilliant hue of the peacock’s tail, likewise, so they say, the universe has simply “happened” by itself. [verse 116] But it is a matter of everyday perception that all results are seen to be produced by causes; it is impossible to find something that arises uncaused. Here, the term perception is being used in a general sense and it covers the notion of inference.
It could perhaps be argued that the whole variety of items of which a lotus is composed: the stem, the size and number of the petals, and so on, are not to be found in the lotus’s cause, and that therefore it is unacceptable to say that its various aspects have each a cause of their own. But in reply to this it should be pointed out that if a result were really present in its cause, a causal relationship could hardly be said to exist between them. On the other hand, it is evident that a lotus does not grow without dependence upon its seed; one can see that it grows out of the grain. This being so, it is a variety in the cause that produces a variety in the result. In other words, as the verse says, a variety in the result proves that there was a division or variety of potency within the cause.
[verse 117] But who or what, it may be asked, has so arranged that there is this variety in the cause? The answer is that there is no extraneous agency. The seed itself cannot arise in the absence of its own cause; its own variety arises from yet an earlier causal variety. But again, if there can be a variety of potentialities in a cause, how is it that only a seed of barley can give rise to the barley plant, and not a seed of rice? Actually, it is not that a given barley grain contains distinct capacities as it were in and of itself. It is through the power of previous causes that the grain is brought forth as something that generates according to its own kind. This is simply the nature of things, which no one can alter.
An alternative reading would be to ask why different causes can produce different effects. The answer is that they manifest owing to their respective earlier causes; and this, once again, is simply the nature of things. It follows, therefore, that what arises without a cause must either be eternal or else nonexistent; whereas phenomena are established as being caused, since they are observed sporadically in one situation or another.

 Refutation of the belief in other-production

 Refutation of the belief in production from a permanent cause

Extraneous production may be discussed according to whether the supposed cause is impermanent or eternal. The first of these alternatives has already been dealt with; we will therefore consider the second. Those who believe in Ishvara say that he is the Lord, all-knowing, eternal, and self-arising. He is divine, pure and worshipful, permanent [immutable], one, and, in the movements of his mind, he is the maker of everything. Possessed of these five attributes, he has created the universe by his premeditated will.
[verse 118] If an almighty deity is said to be the cause of beings, it is incumbent upon those who make this assertion to define his nature.It will be said, perhaps, that he is the great elements: earth, air, fire, and water. Let us admit this [for the sake of argument]. Since all things come into being on the basis of these elements, the latter may be regarded as the (material) cause of the former. This is in fact the Buddhist position also; the only difference is in the name. What they call “God,” we Buddhists refer to as the elements. And since people can name things as they wish, why go to the trouble of proving the existence of God? It does not make sense. Or again, why, Shantideva asks, should we weary ourselves with questions of mere terminology? He, for his part, will not do so.
[verse 119] The theists have said, however, that God is eternal, one, and worthy of veneration, whereas the elements are multiple and transient. Moreover, the latter are without any movement of mind; neither are they divinities to be revered, for they may be trampled underfoot and are not objects of veneration. They are also impure. The theists therefore cannot mean that the elements are God for they attribute to him characteristics that are inconsistent with them. [verse 120] Perhaps they will say that he is space. But this cannot be right either, since space is inert or devoid of creative movement; it is unable to produce anything. In any case, the idea that space is the same as purusha or the self has already been refuted.
The use of such images, the theists will say, does not in fact weaken their position, since, viewed from the side of creatures, the divine nature is inconceivable. But if God is beyond understanding, so is his creative role. If he is inconceivable, what is to be gained by calling him creator? Assertions must be based on reflection and knowledge. If God is utterly unknowable, who can say that he is the creator? [verse 121] Moreover, if the cause, the creator, is unknown, how can we say that creation is willed by him? It is in knowing both the “creator” and the “created” that the causal relationship between them is to be ascertained and expressed. If this were not so, it would follow that even a barren woman’s son could be the creator.
But what is the created work of this almighty deity? Does he create the permanent self and so on, or the transient states of consciousness? In the first case, the theists may say that God creates the self. But do they not also say that the self and the particles of the physical elements (the created effects) are eternal, just like God? If so, how is the attribution of eternity to both cause and effect consistent with their relationship of creator and created? For such a cause is without creative function and such a result is without the character of being created. [verse 122] In the second case it could be argued that a consciousness of blue arises through the perceptual circumstance of a blue object and so on. And from time without beginning, the feelings of joy and sorrow, arising again and again in the mind stream, do so on the basis of preceding actions. This being so, what, the root verse asks, has God created? There cannot be any effects produced by him.
If God, the cause, is beginningless, then, given that he is an immediate cause of unobstructed power, how is it that his created effects could have beginnings? For if this thesis is true, it is impossible to assert that these effects arise only at a given moment and not before. They would have to exist from all time, for it does not make sense for them to be perceptible only momentarily; and the absurd consequence follows that the men and women living today have existed from all eternity.
[verse 123] In reply to this, the theists may defend themselves saying that God creates the universe in stages, and that there are times when he brings forth some things and not others. But granted that they are all God’s creation, how is it that they are not all produced constantly and at once? For if the cause of the whole of creation is God and God alone, and if God is dependent on no other conditional circumstances, the cause for creation in its entirety is present constantly, and therefore the whole of it ought to be created simultaneously.
On the other hand it might be argued that God does in fact depend on various cooperative conditions. But even if that were the case, how is it that these conditions are not entirely present all the time? If it is true that there is nothing that God has not made, it is impossible to claim that what God creates depends also on some cause other than himself. [verse 124] And if he does indeed depend on other conditions, it follows that the cause of creation is rather the coincidence of cause and conditions; it is not God. For this means in effect that when cause and conditions are present, God cannot but bring forth the effects, and conversely, when the cause and conditions do not converge, God is powerless to create. [verse 125] Furthermore, granted that God is dependent on the convergence of cause and conditions, if he is thereby constrained against his will to bring about the suffering of others, it is clear that he is subject to an extraneous power.
And even if he creates according to his pleasure, he is dependent on his wishes and is once again constrained by something else, for he is caught on the hook of his desire. Finally, even if we were to accept that God is the creator of the world, in what does his omnipotent divinity consist? For if he is accounted the maker of objects, he is necessarily impermanent; if he is permanent, this can only mean that he is without causal effectiveness.
[verse 126] Finally, the Mimamsaka theory, that the [material] cause of the universe is the infinitesimal and permanent particle, was disposed of above with the argument that particles may be directionally divided. There is no need to discuss it separately here.

 Refutation of the belief in self-production

 Refutation of the primal substance

A primal substance that is the cause of the world and is characterized in five points as being eternal, one, devoid of consciousness, invisible to ordinary sight, and universally creative is propounded by the Samkhya school, which classifies all phenomena into twenty-five principles. [verse 127] The nature of this primal matter, or prakriti, is defined as the equilibrium of the three universal constituents, or gunas: sattva (pleasure), rajas (pain), and tamas (neutrality). Prakriti is the cause of all manifestation and is thus referred to as “primal.” For the Samkhyas say that, when its constituent elements fall into a state of imbalance, the modulation [or appearance] of the whole multiplicity of the world is set in motion.
[verse 128] It is inconsistent to say that the primal substance is truly one and then say that its nature is threefold. If it has three elements, it is not one. There can be no such thing, therefore, as a primal cause that is both one and permanent. Likewise, the three universal constituents have no real existence in themselves either. For each constituent is again divisible into three. In other words, there is rajas of rajas, sattva of rajas, and tamas of rajas, and so on. Otherwise they would be more fundamental than the primal substance itself. [verse 129] Now if these three causal constituents are nonexistent, the theory of such things as “sound modulation” arising from them becomes, as the root text says, extremely far-fetched. In other words, these modulations must also be nonexistent. [To talk about them] is like talking about [clay] pots not made of clay.
Moreover, if it can be validly established that feelings fall within the mental sphere, it is obviously impossible for pleasure, and so on, to be located in inanimate things like clothing. [verse 130] The Samkhyas may object, however, that their position is tenable because inanimate objects like sounds or clothing do in fact give rise to pleasure, pain, or indifference. But did not Shantideva examine phenomena such as clothes and show them to be nonexistent, at the time that he refuted the existence of bodies?
The Samkhyas should understand too that from the relative point of view, they undermine their own position. For they claim that the cause of woollen cloth is the gunas, pleasure and so forth, and then go on to say that the effect of woollen cloth is pleasure also. In other words, pleasure is made out to be both the cause and the result of cloth. This is ridiculous. It is like saying that a man is both the father and son of the same person. If it is protested that there are different kinds of pleasure, then this militates against the single nature of pleasure and is manifestly at variance with what is perceived. [verse 131] Woollen cloth has certainly never been seen to arise from pleasure and the like, while on the other hand, it is true that things like blankets or garlands of sandal flowers may be seen to give rise to pleasure. But given that things like cloth have no real existence even on the level of the infinitesimal particles, the feelings of pleasure and so on that arise from them cannot exist separately on their own.
But pleasure, the Samkhyas say, is not necessarily dependent on such things as cloth, it is the eternal nature of the primal substance. If that is so, however, it follows that pleasure must be perceived constantly and cannot be averted, for this observable pleasure cannot diverge from its previous nature. Pleasure, on the other hand, is not at all permanently perceived, and thus the assertion of the Samkhyas is untenable. They insist however, that although the gunas have a permanent existence, they have a particular feature of being sometimes manifest and sometimes not. Thus, they say, it does not inevitably follow that they should be constantly detectable. The answer to this is that if pleasure and suchlike were not at all manifest, they would be beyond all knowledge, and it would be inappropriate to speak of their existence. The Samkhyas do not indeed claim this. [verse 132] But if pleasure and so forth are manifest intermittently, the question is: Why are they not the object of constant perception? For the Samkhyas claim that pleasure and the other gunas are perceptiblethey pervade the object of perception and dwell constantly in it. The gunas should therefore be as obvious as a lighted lamp before one’s very eyes.
In fact, the Samkhyas make a distinction, saying that if pleasure and the rest, in a gross apparent form, become more subtle, they exist in a state of nonmanifest potentiality and cannot be perceived. But it is a contradiction to say that pleasure and so forth, defined as one and permanent, have opposite states of grossness and subtlety. How can they possibly be both? [verse 133] The Samkhyas may try to defend themselves by saying that a preceding state of grossness may be cast off and a new state of subtlety assumed. But a pleasure that can become gross or subtle is demonstrably impermanent. And if the Samkhyas assert that pleasure and the other gunas, when manifest, can throw off a preceding state and enter into another, why do they not also attribute impermanence to all of the twenty-five principles? For it is never possible for all of them to be observed with the same mode of appearance. The Samkhyas may say that, whether gross or subtle, the actual nature of pleasure is never lost, and therefore its permanent character is not impaired. To this it must be said that pleasure and its character of grossness are either two different things or the same. If they are different, it follows that when its grossness subsides, the pleasure itself does not subside and is still manifest, and should therefore continue to be felt. [verse 134] If, on the other hand, it is said that this gross aspect is not different from the pleasure but is actually the same thing, the impermanence of pleasure is clearly and certainly established.

 The actual refutation of self-production: the main argument

The Samkhyas argue that when the guna of pleasure ceases to manifest, it abides hidden, in a potential state, within the expanse of prakriti, the primal substance. When it reappears later, it is merely the manifestation of what was already there. For if it did not preexist in any sense, it would be incorrect to speak of its coming into being. It would be like a rabbit’s horns being produced from clay. Therefore whatever becomes manifest must have existed until that moment, according to its own nature, within the sphere of the primal substance. This amounts to saying that the cause and the result coexist.
[verse 135] But the question must be asked, If all results are contemporaneous with their causes, why is it that they are not constantly perceptible? The Samkhyas reply that it is simply because these results are not, at a given moment, apparent to consciousness. Later on they become so, just like a pot in a darkened room becomes visible in the light of a lamp.
In speaking like this, the Samkhyas are undermining their own main thesis. Although they do not mean, and do not say, that manifestation is absent at the time of the cause and that it arises newly, what they have just said in fact comes to this. And if manifestation does occur at the time of the cause, they cannot assert a distinction between manifestation and non-manifestation; and it follows that there must be manifestation from the very beginning. The position of the Samkhyas is both self-contradictory and irrational. For if, for the Samkhyas, the result is truly manifest in the cause, it follows that when they eat their food, they eat their excrement! [verse 136] Moreover, with the money that they use to purchase their clothing made of fine cotton, let them rather buy cotton seeds from which the fabric comes and wear those! That, says Shantideva, is how they might substantiate their doctrine!
The Samkhyas insist, however, that the result coexists in the cause but that ordinary people do not perceive this because their eyes are dimmed by the darkness of stupidity. [verse 137] But [Shantideva replies] this is said by the Samkhya teachers, who claim to have a knowledge of the truth (that the result is already present in the cause). Well then, since this knowledge of the truth exists in the minds of ordinary people, how is it that they do not see it as well (for the cause for it is complete)? How is it that they do not? If we follow the theory of the Samkhyas, a conscious knowledge of reality, being a result, should be present in all sentient beings. But even supposing that people accepted the proposition of the Samkhyas that the result is present in the cause, who was ever seen to consume filth when they ate or to show an interest in cotton seeds when they were buying material for their clothes? The fact is that no one has ever under any circumstances been observed to live according to the Samkhya description of reality, which collapses as a result.
The Samkhyas will perhaps retort that the perceptions of ordinary people have no validity and therefore do not constitute a refutation. But in that case, the manifestations, which have the nature of results and which ordinary people perceive, must be unreal and not true. If they are unreal, to say that these results were present in their causes because they manifested later is meaningless.
[verse 138] The Samkhyas tax the Madhyamikas with the following question. If, because an agent of assessment is deceptive, an object of assessment is not established, and if, as the Madhyamikas say, the assessing consciousness is not a valid (that is, an ultimately valid) cognition, does it not follow that a tenet system assessed by such a consciousness is also deceptive? Consequently, when such an analytical cognition (which is deceptive) makes an assessment saying that, ultimately, on the level of suchness, all is emptiness, and when such emptiness is meditated upon, does not this become an untenable position, for the reason just given?
[verse 139] The answer is that Madhyamikas have not, in fact, elaborated any system of tenets based on the true existence of a specifically locatable object called “emptiness,” regarded as something established by valid cognition. The reason is that, without referring to or basing oneself on a pot or some other actual thing, it is never possible to conceive of a “nonpot” or “nonexistent pot,” [a nonthing or nonexistent thing,] as if this were a separate entity. For this reason, the emptiness of the pot, in the sense of the nonexistent pot, is a lesser, approximate form of emptiness. For it is just the clearing away or refutation of its existence aspect.Therefore the Madhyamikas say that because things are deceptive or unreal in themselves, their nonexistence is also clearly and certainly unreal also.
Well then, say the Samkhyas, what is the point of meditating, telling oneself that phenomena do not exist, given that both their existence and their nonexistence are equally false and unreal? The Madhyamikas reply that it is our clinging to the inherent existence of phenomena, a habit acquired from time without beginning, that is, at the moment, binding us to samsara. The antidote to this is quite simply to acquire the habit of considering phenomena to be without inherent existence. But both their existence or nonexistence are equally unreal. [verse 140] It is just as when people suffer when they dream that they have a child which then dies. In the dream, the thought of the death supplants the thought that the child was alive, yet the thought of the child’s death is itself unreal. Two sticks which, when rubbed together, produce a fire, are themselves burned up in the blaze. Just so, the dense forest of all conceptual bearings, which posit phenomena as existent and nonexistent, will be totally consumed by the fires of the wisdom of ascertaining that all phenomena are without true existence. To abide in that primal wisdom in which all concepts have subsided is the Great Madhyamaka, the Great Middle Way, free from all assertion. It is written in the Mulamadhyamaka-karika:
What is called “existence” is but clinging to things’ permanence;
And “nonexistence” is the view of nothingness.
And thus the wise and learned do not rest
In either “This thing is” or “It is not.”

 Conclusion of the argument

[verse 141] On the basis of the reasons and analytical methods given above, we can see that things do not exist uncaused and also that they do not proceed from an eternal cause. Just like shoots burgeoning from their seeds, all inanimate phenomena arise in dependence on their own causes and conditions; and all animate phenomena arise dependently in a continuous chain, from ignorance down to old age and death. Nevertheless, none of these resultant phenomena coexist in their own causes and conditions, either one by one or in the aggregate. Causal elements taken one by one, are unable to produce effects, and a combination of such elements is not the slightest bit different from these individual elements. For example, a flint stone, steel, and tinder taken individually are unable to produce a flame, and a combination of them, being no different from the said elements, is equally unproductive. This does not mean, however, that the effect arises from causes other than these or that it has coexisted in these causes from the outset.
[verse 142] It does not mean that, when the result appears, it arises from something other than its own causes and conditions. Neither does it mean that the result abides in the present, produced in dependence upon its causes but nevertheless different from them by nature. Furthermore, when it subsides, it does not depart hence and go elsewhere. This is why it is said that all phenomena are by nature empty of their causes.
In this context, the expression “causes taken one by one” refers to the refutation of origination from self and from other. The expression “in the aggregate” indicates the refutation of origination from both [and neither]. This is also explained as the refutation of the four theories of production.

 Investigation of the nature: the great interdependence argument

[verse 143] Outer and inner entities, which the ignorant accept as real, appear but are without true existence. How are they different from mirages? They are not at all different. We need only investigate the horses and oxen of a magical illusion and then the things produced from causes, considering where they come from, where they abide, and where they go to when they subside. We will find that both have an equal status.
[verse 144] Be that as it may, if a resultant effect comes about through the convergence of productive causes, its appearance and the perception of it occur on account of those causes, or through their power. If, on the other hand, the causes are not present, the effect does not appear and is not to be seen. Therefore how can real, objective existence be attributed to what is in fact like a reflection, a figment put together from causes and conditions?
It should be understood that interdependent origination involves none of the extreme positions implied in terms like permanence, annihilation, arising and subsiding, existence and nonexistence. It accords, rather, with the eight examples of illusoriness.As it is written in the sutra, Whatever is produced from causal conditions is not produced; it does not have the nature of a produced thing. Dependence on conditions is the same as emptiness, and those who understand emptiness are careful [in their actions]. The master Nagarjuna said:
But for what originates dependently,
There are no phenomena;
There are no phenomena, therefore,
That are not empty.

 Investigation of the result: the argument that refutes the origination of the existent and the nonexistent effect

[verse 145] When an investigation is made into resultant effects, is a produced effect found to exist or not to exist? If the resultant thing is truly an entity, or rather, if it exists inherently, what need is there for a cause? A relationship of cause and effect cannot properly be ascribed to it. On the other hand, if it were said that the [previously] nonexistent result is produced by a cause, one could reply by asking why a cause is necessary for a result, the nature of which is nonexistence? Generally speaking, what does not exist has no cause. It just abides in its essence of nonbeing. It might perhaps be thought, however, that, even if mere nonbeing is not produced by causes, it is nevertheless through causes that a nonexistent effect is made into an existent thing. This, however, is impossible.
[verse 146] Even if millions of causes were to join forces, they could never make a “nonexistent thing” (something intrinsically nonexistent) pass into existence. In exactly the same way, however many causes there are, they are unable to impart existence to a rabbit’s horns. Nonexistence can never act as the basis of anything. The reason why there can be no passage from “nonexistent thing” into “existent thing” is that a transformation in which the character of nonexistence is not discarded and a transformation in which it is discarded are both untenable. In the first place, how can a nonexistent thing be at the same time an existent thing? Both notions invalidate each other; there is just nothing. In the second place, it is through the removal of its nonexistence that the nonexistent thing is transformed into an existent one, but what can this newly existent thing be? Nothing is possible.
[verse 147] Thus, what is defined as nonexistent cannot, throughout its nonexistence, be a real thing. When can such a thing be said to come into existence? The answer is that it never can. For as long as there is no assumption of existence, there is no relinquishing of nonexistence. [verse 148] If there is no laying aside of the character of nonexistence, there is no possible occasion for coming into existence. Therefore how can one ever speak of a nonexistent thing becoming an existent thing? Clearly, it is impossible. Conversely, just as a nonexistent thing does not become an existent thing, likewise an existent thing does not become a nonexistent thing. Once again, since both terms are mutually exclusive, one can apply the same kind of reasoning as has just been used.
[verse 149] If, on the other hand, an existent thing could become a nonexistent thing, it follows that it would possess the nature of both existence and nonexistence simultaneously. This is why, according to ultimate reality, there is no such thing as cessation and why things have no true existence. And this in turn is the reason why, throughout the three times, beings are never born and never pass away. [verse 150] Thus all beings who appear in the various dimensions of existence manifest and yet have no reality; they are like the visions of a dream. When subjected to reasoned analysis, we find that, just like the banana tree, they are devoid of an underlying essence able to withstand analysis. Therefore, on the ultimate level, there is no difference between attaining nirvana and not attaining it, because where there is no bondage, there is no liberation. For at all times, there is nothing but the state of perfect equality. The Mulamadhyamaka-karika says:
Between these two is not the slightest,
Not the subtlest, distinction.
Although there are different ways of classifying the Madhyamaka arguments, in the present text, they establish that all phenomena, which appear to exist in the manner of cause, result, and nature, are the three doors of liberation. The examination of causes shows that they are (1) devoid of all conceptual characteristics; [in other words, there are no causes]. As regards the nature of phenomena, analysis shows that this is (2) emptiness. And as for the results, analysis reveals that they are (3) beyond expectancy.

 The benefits of realizing emptiness

 The equivalence of the eight worldly concerns

[verse 151] Since all things, such as food and clothing, are empty by their nature, what is there for us to gain or lose? Nothing at all. What praise and honor, what insults and humiliation can be heaped on us and by whom? Again, none. [verse 152] Examine the causes for the experience of joy and sadness. They are found to lack inherent existence. What, then, is there that could be unpleasant in being slandered? What is there that could be delightful in being celebrated? Nothing at all. Let us cast aside all discrimination with regard to these eight worldly concerns and place our minds in meditation on profound emptiness. As Nagarjuna says in his Suhrillekha:
Regard as equal, you who know the world,
All gain and loss, all joy and pain,
All good and ill repute, all praise and blame:
These eight mundane concerns are not the worthy objects of your mind.
If an examination is made on the level of ultimate truth, the question arises: Who is the person craving and what is it that is craved? Neither has inherent existence. [verse 153] Since this world of living beings, if we consider well, has no real existence, who can ever be said to die who lives therein? Who will ever be born in the next life, and who was ever born in the past? Who, moreover, are our friends, and who our dear relations? [verse 154] Let those who, like the wise master Shantideva, investigate the nature of things fully understand that all phenomena are like space and elude the conceptual categories of “is” and “is not.” Let them regard as equal the eight mundane concerns.
 The effortless display of great compassion
The glorious master Atisha has said that when emptiness is realized, all sin and nonvirtue come to an end and great compassion arises. Emptiness possesses the essence of compassion. Therefore, when emptiness is realized, it is in the nature of things that great compassion manifests.
Not realizing that phenomena are empty and that their mode of being lies beyond all conceptuality, ordinary beings take as real what is unreal: They attribute existence to what is nonexistent and selfhood to what is not a self. Therein lies their delusion. They long for happiness, but they are ignorant of how to attain it. They struggle against all that seems hostile, and love and cling to what appears as friendly. [verse 155] Thus they are troubled in body and mind. In situations of joy and pleasure, they distract themselves physically and mentally with dancing and song. But when adversity befalls them, when death occurs or the loss of livestock, or when they fail to get what they want, they suffer. High and low, strong and weak, rich and poor, for friends and family, for wealth and pleasuresall that is desiredeveryone strives and competes with someone else. They slash each other with swords and stab each other with spears. Their possessions, ill-gotten through the sins of body, speech, and mind, are the source of lives of great toil and sorrow, both now and in the future. People pass their time, their minds completely taken in by the senseless pleasures of life.
[verse 156] Through the kindness of religious teachers, the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, beings occasionally perform a little virtue such as observing the eight-precept upavasa vow and so on. Because of this, they are fortunate in their migrations, appearing again and again in the many states of high rebirth in the various universes. There they live, enjoying all the pleasures they desire. But because they fail to practice virtue and instead commit evil actions, they fall, at death, into hell or other of the three lower destinies, and for a long time they suffer unbearable pains. High and low, through states of joy and sorrowsuch are the unpredictable wanderings of sentient beings. [verse 157] Within the three realms of existence, every evil thought of attachment, hatred, stupidity, craving, and so on, will precipitate beings into infernal and other states of lossinto many chasmic abysses of dreadful woe. In such a world, no learning and understanding of reality (the means of liberation) is to be found. Instead, on account of an intense clinging to self with respect to outer and inner phenomena, there arises something quite different: the false conviction in permanence and true existence. In such a situation, the understanding of emptiness free of all conceptual construction is the very antithesis of such mistaken clinging to the true existence of things. Indeed, the study and realization of such-ness or profound emptiness is something quite different in this world. It is like a light shining in an immense darkness.
But now, through the kindness of the compassionate Teacher and his Bodhisattva children, profound doctrines such as the teaching on voidness are expounded and listened to. But perhaps we grow despondent and think to ourselves, “How will someone like me ever be able to understand and realize a teaching like this chapter on the perfection of wisdom, which expounds the teachings on emptiness?” If so, we should understand that we have fallen prey to the “fear of emptiness” (however undaunted we may be by enemies and negative forces). Moreover, it has been said that when people nowadays show no interest in hearing and studying the texts that expound the doctrine of emptiness, and have no grasp of them, this is a sign that emptiness is something to which, in their previous lives, they have never turned their minds.
On the other hand, it has been said that if, when we hear the teachings on emptiness, our minds become elated, and if, through our strength of faith, our eyes fill with tears and our skin stands up in gooseflesh, this is a sign that we already possess a propensity for study and reflection instilled in us in our earlier existences. And it is said too that even though we may not gain realization in this life, if nonetheless we turn our minds to the profound doctrine of emptiness, listening to the teachings and reflecting and meditating on them, it is certain that in our subsequent lives we will hear such teachings again and attain realization. This view is confirmed by the Yogacharachatushataka:
Even though we do not, in this life transcend
Through understanding suchnessevery sorrow,
It is, like any action, certain that, in later lives,
We will without travail attain this goal.
In times gone by, Kubja the Small and Lekyong fell victim to terrible suffering on account of strongly negative karmic residues. Nevertheless, when they encountered the Buddha, they realized the truth and attained arhatship simply through hearing his teachings. The scriptures say that this was through the karma of having become learned in the teachings on the aggregates, elements, and sense fields at the time of the Buddha Kashyapa.
On the other hand, when it comes to emptiness, people who are dull and narrow never even wonder whether phenomena are empty or not. Had they the slightest doubt about it, samsaric existence would fall to shreds for them. As it is said:
Due to little merit, not the slightest doubt
Will rise against phenomena.
Let the slightest doubt arise,
And this existence falls to shreds.
Consequently, at this time, when we have come upon this profound teaching on emptiness, we should give meaning to this encounter, by listening, reflecting, and meditating with joyful hearts.
[verse 158] In this realm of existence, in which the light of suchness does not shine, afflicted by unexampled difficulties, beings languish for ages in a vast ocean of unbearable suffering, stretching beyond the limits of space and time. There, as we have just explained, they are oppressed and beaten down by the strength of their karma and negative emotions. They are feeble in their ability to practice virtue. For even if a good intention surfaces in their minds, the proper support for wholesome activity, namely, a human existence endowed with freedoms and advantages, is short-lived, and they have not the leisure for the practice of virtue.
[verse 159] Throughout their short lives, beings spend their time hoping for longevity, caring for their bodies in all sorts of ways, taking different remedies and cures to maintain a healthy constitution. Then there are others who lack the necessities of food, drink, and so on; they are hungry and destitute and must labor wearily for their livelihood. They spend half their lives in the stupefaction of sleep. Outside and in, they are assailed by different troubles. They abandon themselves to futile behavior in the company of ordinary people whose conduct is no better than that of children. And in their various doings life goes quickly by. It is frittered away, without any virtuous accomplishment to render it significant.
[verse 160] The cause of liberation from samsaric existence, the mind’s discernment of the ultimate realitythe No-Self of phenomena, their lack of true existenceall this is extremely difficult to find. The habit of mental wandering of those who dwell in samsara is extremely powerful, like a river in spate. How could there ever be a way to stop it short, all of a sudden?
[verse 161] Not only is it impossible, but there are demons like Devaputra, friends of darkness, who work and labor to cast us down, to cause us to fall into hell and the other evil destinies. For the lord of demons will not tolerate that a Bodhisattva (for a single one will set many hundreds and thousands of beings in the state of enlightenment) should ever receive an earnest or portent of the attainment of buddhahood. And thus, he will throw many obstacles in the Bodhisattva’s way. He will take false and lying forms, appearing as a Buddha, a Bodhisattva, or the disciple’s teacher, declaring that the disciple has now gained superior qualities. He will denigrate the true Dharma as false, substituting a parody in its place. And he will send his daughters, the mistresses of distraction and stupidity, to create obstacles. As the proverb says, “For profound Dharma, a profound dark demon.”
Moreover, there are many false trails, such as eternalist and nihilist views. And if one does not gain certainty, coming to the conclusion that “This is the pure and unmistaken path,” by discerning its goal and point of view, it is hard to free oneself from doubts and hesitation. For it is difficult to have all the outer and inner conditions favorable to their removal. Nowadays, people love novelty and thus neglect the ancient texts, excellent and pure though they be, liking only what is new. But among the recent texts, there are some that are genuine and some false, and it is difficult to discern the goal and point of view of a genuine teaching from a false oneit is difficult to have certainty, unclouded by doubt.
And even if a teaching is authentic, if it is practiced with doubt, it will be fruitless and without meaning. It is thus hard to have a true discernment. It is hard to overcome distraction. Moreover, if because of doubts and so forth, one dies without ever discovering the light of the Doctrine, [verse 162] it will be extremely hard to find the freedoms of the human state again and to encounter the enlightened beings present in this world. It will be difficult to find time to practice their teachings wholeheartedly and so be able to turn back the flood of desire and the other negative emotions.
[verse 163] “Alas!” says Shantideva. With love and great regret, he laments that in this state of samsara, beings go continuously from sorrow to sorrow. Given their various kinds of suffering, they live in great torment. In their ignorance they are unable to understand what they should do and what they should not do. They are not aware that they are foundering in suffering; they cherish and cling to this existence. Alas, how can one not lament at the thought of their being carried away on the flood of sorrow? [verse 164] There are some people, for example, who wish for the sensation of coolness and bathe themselves repeatedly. Afterward, they are discomforted by the cold and wish to be warm again. Thereupon they apply heat to themselves until they are tormented by the searing temperatures and have to bathe again. They thus torture themselves through this alternation of heat and cold, but, blinded by their desires, they claim that all is well and that they are perfectly happy!
[verse 165] So it is that people live “happily,” abandoning themselves to carefree pleasures, as if the terrible hardships of old age and death will never come to them. But old age will befall them first of all, with incurable sickness in its train, and then at last the implacable Lord of Death will come upon them to kill them. And once again they will have to undergo the unbearable pains of falling into the lower realms.
[verse 166] Destitute of insight into the meaning of suchness, and taking suffering for happiness, beings are tormented in the fires of misery in the three worlds of samsara. When, asks Shantideva, will he be able to extinguish this fire with a rain of happiness that issues from the clouds of his unlimited accumulation of merit? When indeed will such a heavy downpour of all good things supply beings with all that they desire (wealth and comfort, clothing, places of rest, and so on), satisfying their every want and removing the misery of their poverty? And it is with thoughts like these that we should aim for the temporal happiness of beings.
[verse 167] And again in Shantideva’s words, with a view to the state of definite goodness, when will we too understand and assimilate the profound emptiness of all phenomena, the state free of all conceptual constructsthe voidness of the three spheres? For, to the extent that we understand it, we will, with joy and reverence for the welfare of living beings, bring our store of merit to fulfillment. When will we too have a direct experience of the suchness of all things, the union of appearance and emptinessequality itself free from all concepts? And when might we too be able to set this doctrine forththe medicine for beings poisoned by their clinging to the true existence of things and brought to ruin in the three worlds of samsara? O may this come to pass!
When we reflect like this, great compassion is brought to birth. And when we see that phenomena are indeed devoid of true existence, we will be engulfed by such a strength of great compassion that we will never abandon living beings who circle in samsara through their fixated belief in true existence. In sum, the birth in the mind of great compassion and love for others, and complete indifference to the eight worldly concerns, will naturally occur, as this text has explained.
If those, therefore, who wish for fortunate destinies in samsara and the definite goodness of nirvana practice wholesome ways such as generosity, ethical discipline, and meditation, they will certainly reap great benefit thereby. But greater than these is the wisdom of realizing profound emptiness beyond all conceptual elaborations, the deep and final remedy for the two kinds of obscuration. In order to generate it, we must strive in proper study and reflection. As it is said in the Uttaratantra-shastra:
Thus it is by giving that all wealth will be produced;
Perfect ethics lead to high rebirth, while meditation rids you of defilement.
But the veils, emotional and cognitive, are both removed by wisdom.
Therefore wisdom is supreme. Its cause is study of this teaching.
Here ends the ninth chapter of the Bodhicharyavatara, on wisdom.